            The Algebraic CheapLunch:
           Extending FreeLunch Attacks
       on Arithmetization-Oriented Primitives
                 Beyond CICO-1

 Antoine Bak1,2 , Augustin Bariant3 , Aurélien Boeuf1 , Pierre Briaud4 , Morten
                        Øygarden4 , Atharva Phanse4
                              1
                               INRIA, Paris, France
                               2
                                DGA, Paris, France
                             3
                               ANSSI, Paris, France
                         4
                           Simula UiB, Bergen, Norway
            antoine.bak@inria.fr, augustin.bariant@ssi.gouv.fr,
                           aurelien.boeuf@inria.fr
                 {pierre,morten.oygarden,atharva}@simula.no


      Abstract. The security of many arithmetization-oriented (AO) hash
      functions depends of the hardness of Constrained-input constrained-
      output (CICO) problems. These problems have received significant at-
      tention from the cryptographic community in recent years, with notable
      advances in Gröbner basis and resultant-based attacks, yet progress has
      mainly been limited to CICO problems restricted to a single output.
      In this work, we build on the “FreeLunch method” of Bariant et al.
      (Crypto 2024) that constructs Gröbner bases “for free” in this particu-
      lar case, and extend it to CICO problems with multiple outputs. More
      precisely, we consider tools for solving weighted polynomial systems,
      and show how to apply them in the AO setting. This results in new
      polynomial modelings, more efficient methods for computing the initial
      Gröbner basis under certain assumptions, and improved complexity esti-
      mates for the change of ordering step, derived from tighter upper bounds
      on the ideal degree. We apply our framework to Poseidon, Neptune and
      XHash8, where our assumptions are experimentally verified, and theory
      matches practice. For Griffin and ArionHash our assumptions are not
      verified, leaving us with improved, yet loose, upper bounds on the ideal
      degree. While our results do not threaten the security of any full-round
      hash function, they provide new insights into the security of these prim-
      itives under more general CICO problems.

      Keywords: Gröbner basis · Hash function · Poseidon · XHash · Arion-
      Hash · Griffin


1   Introduction
The increasing deployment of practical zero-knowledge (ZK) proof protocols has
created a need for hash functions that allow a preimage to be proven efficiently
using the corresponding proof system. The construction of these hash functions
depends a lot on the cost model of the target proof system. In general, a re-
quirement is that the round functions of the permutation can be verified using a
low-degree function, hence the name Arithmetization-Oriented (AO). This can
be achieved by having the entire round function be of low degree, such as in Po-
seidon [34] and Neptune [37], or by including operations that have a low degree
inverse, such as in Anemoi [16], XHash [2], Griffin [31], and ArionHash [44]. Due
to their inherent algebraic structure, algebraic attacks (especially Gröbner basis
attacks) are often the main attack vector against these hash functions. We re-
mark that some recent designs also rely on the use of Split-and-Lookup S-boxes,
such as Monolith [33], Reinforced Concrete [32], and Tip5 [45], which will remain
beyond the scope of this analysis.
    AO hash functions are typically constructed by first designing a permutation
F : Ftp −→ Ftp and then using it in a sponge construction [14]. By their very na-
ture, the security of hash functions in sponge constructions is directly dependent
on the difficulty of solving the Constrained-Input Constrained-Output (CICO)
problem for the underlying permutation. The abovementioned algebraic attacks
generally proceed by modeling this CICO problem as a multivariate polynomial
system, and then find its solution(s). These solutions can, in turn, be used to
instantiate attacks on the overall sponge construction.
    The CICO modeling is usually solved as follows. First, ones computes a
Gröbner basis for the ideal it generates, with respect to a suitable monomial
order. This first basis is then converted into a second Gröbner basis that contains
a univariate polynomial, whose roots contain the value of one of the entries of a
solution. The remaining entries are now (comparatively) easy to recover. While
the default choice in earlier attacks on AO hash functions was to adopt the grevlex
order for the first step, recent progress came from choosing an “easier” order
tailored to the modeling [7,17], for which generic Gröbner basis algorithms [19,20]
seemed more efficient or could even be bypassed. For the second step, all attacks
rely on change-of-ordering algorithms in the FGLM framework [28].
    Estimating the complexity of these two steps is essential for assessing the se-
curity guarantees of a given hash function. These complexities are influenced by
intrinsic properties of the CICO modeling such as regularity conditions, or the
degree of the associated ideal. However, these properties are often challenging
to determine theoretically. As a result, many earlier works have taken a more
pragmatic approach by partially relying on small-scale experiments for this esti-
mation – or indeed to extrapolate the entire solving cost from small-scale tests.
The difficulties in estimating these attacks are generally related to understand-
ing the particular structure of the underlying AO permutation, in combination
with that of the precise CICO problem we are trying to solve. In particular, a
more fine-grained examination of these structures has already led to improved
solving methods and, in some cases, to improved polynomial modelings [7,17].

Influence of the prime field size. The size of the prime p in the finite field Fp
used in ZK-friendly primitives varies greatly depending on the use case. It ranges
from 31-bit primes (eg. in Plonky3) to 256-bit primes when the field is the scalar


                                         2
field of an elliptic curve. When p ∼ 2256 , a permutation in sponge mode with
capacity c = 1 is sufficient for guaranteeing 128 bits of security against collision
and preimage attacks. This makes CICO-1 – i.e., the CICO problem with a single
degree of input freedom, and a single output is observed – relevant for assessing
the security of the sponge hash function. However, for smaller fields, such as 64
or 31-bit prime fields5 , a larger capacity is required for guaranteeing 128 bits
of security. In this setting, a study of the CICO-k problem for k > 1 is more
relevant for assessing the security of the hash function.

Previous works. In the CICO-1 setting, several works have already been able
to leverage the structure of the input modeling to obtain more efficient attacks,
for instance, by choosing a custom ordering for which this modeling is already
a Gröbner basis [7] and/or by using resultants for variable elimination to ob-
tain a univariate expression in a somewhat more direct way than using FGLM
methods [47,8]. While these approaches have been very successful for CICO-k
problems with k = 1, it is unclear whether they can be extended to larger values
of k. The case of k > 1 has received much less attention from the cryptographic
community. So far, most works in this setting either extrapolate complexity esti-
mates from experiments on reduced primitives (see [3] for Poseidon and [40] for
Anemoi) or use generic bounds on the Gröbner basis computation with respect
to the grevlex ordering to estimate the complexity of the first step [36]. The only
exception we are aware of is the recent work of [17] on Anemoi, that derives an
explicit Gröbner basis for CICO-k with t = 2k branches, and proves the degree
of the ideal it generates.

Our results. In this work, we propose an extension of the so-called FreeLunch
approach of [7] to the k > 1 case, that we refer to as the “CheapLunch” approach.
In particular, we give a general framework allowing us to model primitives in
such a way that, under some genericity assumptions and for a custom monomial
ordering, a Gröbner basis of the modeling can be computed efficiently (though
not quite “for free”). In turn, this transfers the bottleneck for Gröbner basis
attacks from the Gröbner basis computation step to the change-of-ordering step,
just as in the FreeLunch setting when k = 1.
    This custom ordering, as well as our estimates for the first step, are related
to well-known results on weighted systems [26]. The initial motivation for using
these results was, in fact, to compute tight upper bounds on the ideal degree
DI , as these bounds are instrumental to estimate the change-of-ordering step.
Finally, when the genericity assumptions required by the CheapLunch framework
do not hold, our work still provides (loose) upper bounds on DI . We find these
to be valuable in cases where such bounds were either entirely missing, or purely
experimentally derived.
    We have applied our framework to a number of primitives, all backed by
experiments6 . The underlying genericity assumptions are verified for Poseidon,
5
    As in the instances of Poseidon2 used in the Ethereum bounty program.
6
    Our     code    is    available at    https://github.com/atharva-simulauib/
    algebraic-cheaplunch


                                         3
Neptune and XHash8. As a particular contribution, we provide a new modeling
for the CICO-k problem for the two former primitives, to which our framework
can be applied and prove bounds on the ideal degree that were first claimed
in [11]. We note that the results on Poseidon are especially timely due to the
ongoing cryptanalysis initiative organized by the Ethereum Foundation (see the
earlier footnote). We also apply the CheapLunch framework to Griffin and
ArionHash, although we find that the genericity assumptions are not satisfied for
these primitives. Our results are summarized in Table 1.


           Primitive                      DI ≤               Cheap GB        source
                                               k·R
        Anemoi (2k = t)              (d + 2)                     ✓            [17]
    XHash8 (k + nS ≤ t)              (dnS +2k )R                 ✓        Section 4.1
                                         k·RF +RP
          Poseidon                   d                           ✓        Section 4.2
                                     k·RF        RP †
                                   4       ·d                             Section 4.2
          Neptune                                                ✓
                            4(k−1)Rf,1 +Rf,2 · dRP −(t−k)‡                Section 4.3
           Griffin                   (d2 · 3k )R                 ✗        Section 5.1
          ArionHash                       (16)                   ✗        Section 5.2

    †
    Sponge mode, without round skipping tricks.
    ‡
    Preimage on k output coordinates in compression mode, with subspace trails.
Table 1. Ideal degree DI and applicability of the CheapLunch method to solve CICO-k
on several primitives, where t is the number of branches, d is the degree of the monomial
power maps, and R is the number of rounds (RF for full rounds and RP for partial
rounds for Poseidon and Neptune), without considering round-skipping tricks.




Outline. We provide background on the CICO problem in sponge hash functions,
Gröbner bases and weighted systems in Section 2. Our approach is presented in
Section 3, where we define CheapLunch systems and then detail how to perform
and analyze the two solving steps when these systems satisfy the genericity
assumptions of above. We provide applications where these assumptions are
verified in Section 4, and conclude with cases where they are not in Section 5.


2       Preliminaries

2.1      CICO problem

The main focus of this work will be the analysis of AO hash functions using the
sponge construction [14]. These sponges are, in our setting, typically instanti-
ated via AO permutations F : Ftq → Ftq (where Fq is a finite field). A crucial


                                             4
security requirement for these constructions is for the underlying permutation
to be secure with respect to the Constrained-Input Constrained-Output (CICO)
problem. For algebraic cryptanalysis, this problem is typically defined as follows.


Definition 1 (CICO-(in,out) Problem). Let F : Ftq −→ Ftq be a permutation
and let 1 ≤ in,out < t such that in + out ≤ t. The CICO-(in,out) problem
asks to find x ∈ {0}in × Ft−in
                          q    such that F (x) ∈ {0}out × Ft−out
                                                           q     .
Said differently, a CICO-(in,out) instance is a CICO instance where out output
constraints of F need to be satisfied through the choice of t − in degrees of
freedom in the input. We recall the sponge construction and discuss how CICO
problems are related to concrete hash function attacks in Appendix A. When
in = out = k, we simply use the notation CICO-k.
    As mentioned in the introduction, the majority of recent algebraic cryptanal-
yses focuses on the CICO-1 case, with the exception of [17] in the case of Anemoi.
In the works of [7,47,8], the condition out = 1 (or in = 1 if F −1 is considered)
is a requirement for the applicability of their attacks and no straightforward
adaptation exists for larger out values. We also note that other works relying
on extrapolating scaled-down experiments [9,40] pragmatically target CICO-1,
as the CICO problem is easier in this setting and thus allows more reliable ex-
trapolations. In this work, however, we will tackle the general CICO-(in,out)
problem with in≥ 2 and out≥ 2 for various permutations, through both theo-
retical arguments and extensive experiments.
    The initial step in our attacks is to model a given CICO problem as a system
of multivariate polynomial equations whose common solution(s) correspond to
the solution(s) of this problem. Possible modelings will be further explored in
Section 4 and 5, while the rest of Section 2 is devoted to solving tools.

2.2   Polynomial system solving via Gröbner bases
Let {P1 , . . . , Pm } ⊂ F[x1 , . . . , xn ] be a polynomial system over a field F and let
I = ⟨P1 , . . . , Pm ⟩ be its associated ideal. An essential tool for computing with I
– which will ultimately allow us to solve {P1 , . . . , Pm } – is that of Gröbner bases,
which are defined up to a choice of monomial ordering. A monomial ordering is
a well-order on Nn such that if α ≺ β, then α + γ ≺ β + γ for γ ∈ Nn . We say
that xα ≺ xβ if α ≺ β. In this paper, we will make use of the three following
monomial orderings:
 – Lexicographical (lex ): We have α ≺lex β if there exists an index 1 ≤ i ≤ n
   such that αj = βj , j < i and αi < βi .
 – Weighted graded reverse lexicographical (wgrevlex ): Let w ∈ Rn≥0 a weight
                                     Pn            Pn             Pn
   vector.
   Pn      We have that α ≺w β if i=1 wi αi < i=1 wi βi or i=1 wi αi =
     i=1 wi βi and α ≻lex β (note that we take the reversed lexicographical
   order in the case where the two monomials have the same weight).
 – Graded reverse lexicographical (grevlex ): This order is a particular case of
   the wgrevlex ordering, in the case where w = (1, . . . , 1).


                                            5
For a polynomial P , we denote by LM≺ (P ) its leading monomial with respect
to ≺ and by P top its homogeneous component of highest weight with respect to
a given weight vector w.
Definition 2 (Gröbner Basis). A Gröbner basis of I with respect to a mono-
mial ordering ≺, also referred to as a ≺-Gröbner basis of I, is a set of polynomials
G ⊂ I such that

              ⟨LM≺ (h) | h ∈ I⟩ = ⟨LM≺ (g) | g ∈ G⟩ := ⟨LM (G)⟩ .

We moreover say that G is reduced if every g ∈ G is monic, and does not contain
any monomial in LM≺ (G \ {g}).
From the knowledge of a Gröbner basis of an ideal, one can perform reductions
modulo this ideal. For a polynomial P and a system G that is a ≺-Gröbner basis,
we denote by RedG,≺ (P ) its reduction modulo I = ⟨G⟩ using the ordering ≺, i.e.,
the only polynomial in P + I which contains no monomial in ⟨LM≺ (h) | h ∈ I⟩.
    Due to the elimination property of the lex ordering, we know that the (re-
duced) Gröbner basis of a zero-dimensional ideal contains a univariate polyno-
mial Gn in xn , and we can solve the remaining system efficiently from its roots.
Note that some recent cryptanalyses of Anemoi [40,17] have put emphasis on the
extra property that the ideal is in shape position [30] to facilitate this remaining
solving process. Although it helps simplify the approach, and while this property
is generic for radical zero-dimensional ideals [10], it is not strictly needed in our
setting. Indeed, while the number of variables n in the system may be fairly
large, we are usually interested in solving CICO-(in,out) problems, in which we
only need to recover at most in variables. Furthermore, we expect a significant
reduction in complexity as more of these variables are recovered. We may thus
summarize the main steps of solving a zero-dimensional ideal I as:

 1. Find a Gröbner basis of I for a suitable monomial order.
 2. Convert this Gröbner basis into a Gröbner basis in the lex order.
 3. Solve the polynomial Gn and recover the solutions.

In the general case, we expect Step 1. to be the bottleneck in solving I, with
grevlex chosen as the default order as it is usually the most efficient in practice to
compute Gröbner bases. However, this is not necessarily true for the AO setting,
where Step 1. can sometimes be made trivial through the use of weighted orders
tailored to the underlying permutation [7]. In this case, we naturally expect Step
2. to form the bottleneck of the solving method. Indeed, either way, we typically
expect that Step 3. will be negligible compared to the first two steps.


2.3   Gröbner bases for weighted homogeneous systems

Our approach will make use of a tailored wgrevlex ordering for the first Gröbner
basis computation. While the analysis of Gröbner basis algorithms with respect
to graded monomial orders (i.e., w = (1, . . . , 1)) is well-known among experts


                                          6
in algebraic cryptanalysis when applied to generic systems, we anticipate that
readers may be less familiar with the case of more general weight vectors w;
the analysis of which has been mainly restricted to the computer algebra liter-
ature7 [25,26]. We therefore devote this subsection to survey the results from
this area that will be useful to us. As in the graded case, it seems that tighter
complexity bounds are known for Gröbner basis algorithms applied to weighted
homogeneous systems than to affine ones. In fact, if our affine CICO modeling
satisfies a regularity condition detailed below, we will see that finding a first
Gröbner basis reduces to computing a Gröbner basis for the homogeneous com-
ponents of maximal weighted degree. As such, we do not focus on the affine case
here, and will return to it in Section 5 when this condition does not apply.
    For homogeneous systems, it is known that a grevlex Gröbner basis can be
computed incrementally by performing row reduction on homogeneous Macaulay
matrices up to some degree D using Lazard’s approach [42]. Note that state-of-
the-art Gröbner basis algorithms [19,20] follow the same framework. In [25,26],
these algorithms have been adapted to a weighted homogeneous system P by
observing that for any polynomial P that is homogeneous with respect to w, the
polynomial homw (P ) := P (xw              wn
                              1 , . . . , xn ) is homogeneous in the usual sense. For
                                1


instance, their approach is to apply [19,20] to the system

                      homw (P) = {homw (P1 ), . . . , homw (Pm )},

without requiring any modifications, and then to deduce from the grevlex Gröbner
basis of homw (P) the desired reduced Gröbner basis for P [26, Proposition 10].
This method leverages the structure of P, as it does not consider all the homo-
geneous Macaulay matrices associated to the system.

Definition 3 (Weighted homogeneous Macaulay matrix). Let P ⊂ F[x]
be a system that is weighted homogeneous with respect to a weight vector w. The
associated weighted homogeneous Macaulay matrix of weight D is the matrix
whose rows represent the polynomials xα Pi , wt(xα Pi ) = D and the columns
represent the monomials of weight D. The coefficient ((α, i), β) is equal to the
coefficient of xβ in xα Pi .

The approach of [26] can equivalently be viewed as performing row reduction on
Macaulay matrices of this kind up to a certain degree, referred to as the weighted
degree of regularity wdreg .

Definition 4 (Weighted degree of regularity, Definition 2 in [26]). The
weighted degree of regularity of a weighted homogeneous system P, denoted wdreg ,
is the lowest degree D such that the rowspan of the Macaulay matrices of weight
d ≤ D contains a wgrevlex Gröbner basis of P.

7
    The only exception that we are aware of is [22], which applied to methods of [25] in
    elliptic curve cryptanalysis.


                                            7
   If w1 , . . . , wn denote the respective weights of x1 , . . . , xn , then the number of
entries in the weighted Macaulay matrices can be bounded by
                                                            n
                                   (                                              )
                                                         X
                                                     n
      SD(wdreg ; (w, 1)) := # (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ N             wi · ai ≤ wdreg , (1)
                                                                          i=1

where SD is known as the Sylvester denumerant. There is no analytic formula
for this value, but it can be computed exactly using the generating series in [1,
Theorem 4.1.2]. For our purposes, it will be sufficient to approximate this value
(as in [26, Section 5]) and estimate the complexity of computing a wgrevlex
Gröbner basis for a weighted homogeneous system P of m polynomials in n
variables by                         ω            ω 
                                 1          n + wdreg
                         O    Qn                           ,                  (2)
                                i=1 wi          n
where 2 ≤ ω ≤ 3 is the linear algebra constant and wdreg is the weighted degree
of regularity. This estimate calls for tight upper bounds on wdreg . Such bounds
are known under standard genericity assumptions used for graded systems, by
taking into account the extra weight condition. The first of these is as follows.
Definition 5 (Regular sequence, Definition 4 in [26]). Let (w1 , . . . , wn )
be a system of weights and let P = (P1 , . . . , Pm ) ⊂ F[x1 , . . . , xn ] be a sequence
of weighted homogeneous polynomials of respective weighted degrees d1 , . . . , dm .
The sequence P is said to be regular in F[x1 , . . . , xn ] if it satisfies one of the
following equivalent properties
 1. ∀i ∈ {1..m}, Pi is not a zero divisor in F[x1 , . . . , xn ]/⟨P1 , . . . , Pi−1 ⟩;
 2. The Hilbert series of the ideal generated by P is equal to
                                                  Qm
                                                        (1 − z di )
                        HF[x1 ,...,xn ]/⟨P⟩ (z) = Qni=1        wi
                                                                    .                                         (3)
                                                   i=1 (1 − z )

Remark 1. Both of the equivalent conditions above will be useful to us. Indeed,
we will use Condition 1. for complexity estimates and theoretical arguments on
regularity, while we will adopt Condition 2. in experimental verification.
For a regular sequence P, the weighted degree of regularity can be upper bounded
by the weighted Macaulay bound [25, Theorem 2]:
                                             n
                                             X
                                 wdreg ≤           (di − wi ) + max {wi }.                                    (4)
                                             i=1

This bound can be further sharpened if the sequence P satisfies the following
slightly stronger property.
Definition 6 (Simultaneous Noether Position (Determined Case)). Let
P = (P1 , . . . , Pn ) be a polynomial sequence in F[x1 , . . . , xn ]. We say that P is in
Simultaneous Noether Position (SNP) if for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the projected sequence
(P1 (x1 , . . . xi , 0, . . . , 0), . . . , Pi (x1 , . . . xi , 0, . . . , 0)) is regular over F[x1 , . . . , xi ].


                                                        8
    If the sequence P is in SNP, and its weighted degrees satisfy a certain con-
dition relative to w, the following upper bound on wdreg holds.

Theorem 1 (Theorem 12 in [26]). Let (w1 , . . . , wn ) be a system of weights
and let P = (P1 , . . . , Pm ) be a sequence of weighted homogeneous polynomials
of respective weighted degrees d1 , . . . , dm such that di is divisible by wi for any
1 ≤ i ≤ n and di ≥ wi−1 for any 2 ≤ i ≤ n. Assume that the sequence P is
in SNP for the variable ordering x1 > · · · > xn . Then the weighted degree of
regularity of P is bounded by
                                       n
                                       X
                             wdreg ≤     (di − wi ) + wn .
                                       i=1



2.4   Ideal degree for weighted homogeneous systems

The complexity of the change-of-order algorithms used in the second step in the
solving method presented in Section 2.2 is polynomial in the degree of the ideal,
which we define in the following. A lengthier discussion on these algorithms will
be provided in Appendix C.

Definition 7 (Ideal degree). For a zero-dimensional ideal I ⊂ F[x1 , . . . , xn ],
the ideal degree DI is the dimension of the F-vector space F[x1 , . . . , xn ]/I.

For weighted homogeneous systems, the ideal degree can be upper bounded using
the weighted Bézout bound
                                     Qn
                                           di
                              DI ≤ Qni=1 ,                                (5)
                                          w
                                       i=1 i

that can be seen as a particular case of the BKK bound [12,39,41]. We will not
discuss equality cases here, though we note that they do arise in particular when
the input sequence is regular. For example, the following result is derived in [25,
Theorem 2] by evaluating the Hilbert series of Definition 5 with m = n at z = 1.

Theorem 2 (Weighted Bézout equality in the regular case, Theorem
2 in [25]). Let (w1 , . . . , wn ) be a system of weights and let P = (P1 , . . . , Pn ) be
a sequence of weighted homogeneous polynomials of respective weighted degrees
d1 , . . . , dn which is also regular. Then, the degree of the ideal ⟨P⟩ is equal to the
weighted Bézout bound:
                                              Qn
                                                   di
                                      D⟨P⟩ = Qni=1 .
                                                   w
                                                i=1 i

For an affine system P whose components of highest weight form a homogeneous
regular sequence, it is explained at the end of [26, §5.2] that one can use the same
bound in the complexity estimates.


                                             9
3     The CheapLunch Framework for Solving CICO-k

The CICO modeling we consider is akin to that of [7, Section 3]. We recall its
generation in Section 3.1 on a toy example. The rationale behind our approach
is to pick a certain weighted monomial order for which we can precisely analyze
the first Gröbner basis computation for several ciphers, and which allowed us to
find tighter upper bounds on the ideal degree.
    To find a first Gröbner basis, we observe that this order effectively splits
our modeling into two parts: one part Q for which we will compute a Gröbner
basis G(Q) and one part P whose leading monomials will be coprime to those
of G(Q), whenever Qtop is regular. Using Propositions 3 and 4 from Appendix
A.1), the system P ∪ G(Q) is then a Gröbner basis, making the computation of
G(Q) the only non-trivial task in our first step. Note that the use of tailored
monomial orders to ensure coprimality among the leading terms of polynomials
has already been studied in [7,47] for the AO setting. However, when Qtop is not
regular, one cannot apply the same Gröbner basis approach.
    In the change of ordering step, we also use this weighted structure in order
to give tight upper bounds on the ideal degree DI and to marginally improve
generic FGLM estimates (Section 3.5 and Appendix C).


3.1     Toy example

Recall that we are interested in solving the CICO-(in,out) problem (Defini-
tion 1) for an AO permutation F : Ft → Ft . For the purposes of illustration,
we set t−in = out = k, that is, we want to solve for x1 , . . . , xk such that
F (0, . . . , 0, x1 , . . . , xk ) = (0, . . . , 0, ∗, . . . , ∗). Furthermore, let F be of the form
   | {z } | {z }                      | {z } | {z }
      t−k            k                  k         t−k


                             F = Ar ◦ S ◦ Ar−1 ◦ S ◦ · · · ◦ S ◦ A0 ,

where Ai : Ft → Ft is an invertible, affine mapping for 0 ≤ i ≤ r, and
                                                                                             
                                      1/α
          S : (z1 , . . . , zt ) 7−→ z1 , f2 (z1 , . . . , zt ), . . . , ft (z1 , . . . , zt ) ,

where f2 , . . . , ft are polynomials of degree d, and α > 1 is an integer such that
the power 1/α forms an inverse map over F. To ensure both efficiency and a high
overall degree, the integers d and α are typically be chosen to be small, while
1/α is large (as a power over F).


Polynomial modeling. The modeling we consider is (a slight generalization
of) the modeling considered in [7, Section 3]. The idea is to symbolically evaluate
the permutation F round by round from the initial x-variables x1 , . . . , xk , and
only introduce new y-variables and equations to circumvent the large degree
caused by the power 1/α. More concretely, write (h1 , . . . , ht ) for the symbolic
evaluation of the state before the ℓ-th S-box, where each hi is a polynomial in


                                                     10
the variables x, y1 , . . . , yℓ−1 . The first entry in the output state is represented by
a new variable yℓ , while the remaining entries are defined by symbolic evaluation
of the input state. The output of the S-box is

                       (yℓ , f2 (h1 , . . . , ht ), . . . , ft (h1 , . . . , ht )) ,

and the equation relating the new variable yℓ to the earlier input state is

                    Pℓ (x, y1 , . . . , yℓ ) = yℓα − h1 (x, y1 , . . . , yℓ−1 ),       (6)

which is added to the polynomial system. This construction yields a system of
k + r polynomials over F[x, y], where y := y1 , . . . , yr . This system can further
be divided into two parts: P = {P1 , . . . , Pr } which are the round polynomials
as described in (6), and Q = {Q1 , . . . , Qk } which are given by the symbolic
state of the k first outputs of F , which we require to be zero. Note that the
polynomials in Q will depend on all variables x, y and generically be of degree
dr . The equations Pi will be of degree di , and contain the variables x, y1 , . . . yℓ .

Monomial ordering. The idea of [7] was to choose a weighted order in which
yiα is the leading term of Pi . To achieve this, we consider a weight vector
w = (wx , wy ), where wx ∈ Zk and wy ∈ Zr encode the weight of the x- and
y-variables, respectively. Following [7], we choose wx = (1, . . . , 1) and wy =
(1, d, d2 , . . . , dr−1 ). On the one hand, examining the weighted degree of Pℓ in
Equation (6) yields

                          wt(h1 ) ≤ dℓ−1 < αdℓ−1 = wt(yℓα ),

which ensures that LM(Pℓ ) = yℓα , for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ r. On the other hand, the poly-
nomials in Q will have weight at most dr , which can only be achieved by mono-
mials in pure x-variables. Thus, we generically expect the leading monomials in
                                                                                  r
the Qi -polynomials to only depend on x. In particular, we expect LM(Q1 ) = xd1
when k = 1, which implies that all polynomials in {P, Q1 } have coprime leading
terms under this monomial order, and hence form a Gröbner basis for the asso-
ciated ideal by Proposition 4. In fact, this particular case readily corresponds to
the FreeLunch setting of [7].

The Case of k ≥ 2. When k ≥ 2, one can no longer directly apply the above
reasoning, as the leading monomials in the polynomials Q can no longer be
expected to be coprime (although they still only depend on x under the above
weight vector w). Moreover, since all variables x are introduced at the start,
and are presumable efficiently mixed throughout the application of F , it seems
very unlikely that there will exist combinations of polynomial modelings and
monomial orders that will yield a direct Gröbner basis without any computation.
Still, we note that the above modeling {P, Q} yields a portion of the polynomials,
P, whose leading monomials are well-behaved and coprime with respect to y and
the other polynomials. In particular, if the Gröbner basis G(Q) were to contain
leading monomials only involving x, the above approach could be adapted.

                                                   11
    We will see that this scenario occurs whenever the system Qtop formed by
the components of highest weight in Q is regular in the sense of Definition 5 (to
achieve this, we may possibly refine the modeling of Q and carefully choosing
wx ). In this case, we can essentially reduce the problem of Gröbner basis com-
putation for the whole system {P, Q} ⊂ R := F[x, y] to the well-understood
problem of Gröbner basis computation of the weighted regular system Qtop in
the polynomial subring Rx := F[x].
    Definition 8 formalizes the type of polynomial system illustrated in our toy
example, that will be the focus of our work. Note again that FreeLunch systems
as introduced in [7] correspond to the case m = 1 in this definition.

Definition 8 (CheapLunch system (CLS)). Let m, n ≥ 0 and R =
F[x1 , . . . , xm , y1 , . . . , yn ] be a ring with a weighted monomial ordering w. We
say that the polynomials P1 , . . . , Pn , Q1 , . . . , Qm ∈ R form a CheapLunch sys-
tem (CLS) if the following is satisfied.
                  α
      LM(Pj ) = yj j , αj ≥ 1, for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n,
      Qtop
       i   ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xm ] for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m.

We moreover write P = (P1 , . . . , Pn ) and Q = (Q1 , . . . , Qm ).

Motivated by the above discussion, the rest of Section 3 will study the solving of
CheapLunch systems for which the top part Qtop is regular. Non-regular Cheap-
Lunch systems arising from some AO hash functions are tackled in Section 5.

Definition 9 (Regular CheapLunch system). By slight abuse of terminol-
ogy, we say that a CheapLunch system {P, Q} ⊂ R is regular for a weight vector
w = (wx , wy ) if the sequence Qtop formed by the components of highest weight
in Q is regular in Rx in the sense of Definition 5 for the weight vector wx .


3.2     Gröbner bases for regular CheapLunch systems

We now justify the first step of our solving method for regular CheapLunch
systems. We will see that the regularity of Qtop plays a role much beyond its use
in the estimate for computing G(Qtop ). As in the graded case, Lemma 1 below
follows from the absence of degree falls in Q when Qtop is weighted regular and
shows that a Gröbner basis G(Q) can be computed from that of G(Qtop ).

Lemma 1. Let Q = (Q1 , . . . , Qm ) ⊂ F[x1 , . . . , xm ] be an affine sequence and let
≺ be some (weighted)
                 Pm    monomial order for which Qtop is regular. Suppose further
that the set { j=1 fij · Qtop
                           j }1≤i≤g is a reduced ≺-Gröbner basis of ⟨Q
                                                                                top
                                                                                    ⟩ =
   top         top
                                        P m
⟨Q1 , . . . , Qm ⟩. Then we have that { j=1 fij Qj }1≤i≤g is a (not necessarily
reduced) ≺-Gröbner basis for the inhomogeneous ideal I = ⟨Q1 , . . . , Qm ⟩.
                                                               Pm
Proof. Using Definition 2, we want to show that LM (h) ∈ ⟨LM ( j=1 fij Qj ) | 1 ≤
i ≤ g⟩ for any element h ∈ I. Without loss of generality, we can assume that h


                                           12
                  Pm
is of the form h = j=1 hj Qj , where hj is top-reduced by ⟨Q1 , . . . , Qj−1 ⟩. We
can now rewrite h as follows:
                    m               m                  m
                                          htop top
                                                         (hj − htop top
                    X               X                  X
              h=          hj Qj =          j Qj    +            j )Qj
                    j=1             j=1                j=1
                    m                     m
                           top      top
                                            (hj − htop       top
                    X                     X
                +         hj (Qj − Qj ) +          j )(Qj − Qj ) .
                    j=1                         j=1


We can distinguish two cases:
                          Pm                                    Pm top top
1. Case LM (h) = LM ( j=1 htop         top
                                 j Qj ). In this case,              j=1 hj Qj    ∈ ⟨Qtop ⟩,
                           Pm
   hence LM (h) ∈ ⟨LM ( j=1 fij Qtop   j ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ g⟩.
                          Pm
2. Case LM (h) ̸= LM ( j=1 htop   j   Q top
                                        j ). As the other terms in the sum have
                                         m
   lower weight, this implies that j=1 htop           top
                                       P
                                              j Qj          = 0. Thus, there exist 1 ≤
                      top             top top          top
   i ≤ m such that hi ̸= 0 and hi Qi ∈ ⟨Qi−1 , . . . , Qtop          1 ⟩. As the sequence
   is regular, this implies that htop
                                    i   ∈  ⟨Qtop
                                             i−1 , . . . , Q top
                                                             1   ⟩,  which contradicts the
   assumption that hi is top-reduced by ⟨Q1 , . . . , Qi−1 ⟩.
                                                                                         ⊔
                                                                                         ⊓

Finally, Proposition 1 gives the structure of the Gröbner basis for a regular
CheapLunch system {P, Q}, obtained from G(Q) by simply appending the poly-
nomials of P.

Proposition 1 (Gröbner basis of a regular CLS). Let {P, Q} be a regular
CheapLunch system with respect to a weighted monomial order ≺ and let G(Q)
be a ≺-Gröbner basis of Q. Then, the set G(Q) ∪ P is a ≺-Gröbner basis for the
ideal ⟨P⟩ + ⟨Q⟩.

Proof. Using the proof of Lemma 1, we have that ⟨LM (Q)⟩ = ⟨LM (Qtop )⟩ as
Qtop is weighted regular. In particular, this means that the leading monomials
of the elements in G(Q) will be in F[x1 , . . . , xm ]. We can eventually apply Buch-
berger’s Criterion (Proposition 3 in Appendix B) to any pair of distinct elements
f1 , f2 ∈ G(Q) ∪ P to conclude. First, if both f1 and f2 belong to G(Q), then
Spol(f1 , f2 ) will reduce to 0 by applying this criterion in the reverse direction
in the Gröbner basis G(Q). Otherwise, if f1 or f2 is an element of P, then its
leading monomial will, by Definition 8, be coprime to the leading monomial of
the other element of the pair, and we can conclude by Proposition 4.               ⊔
                                                                                   ⊓


3.3   Gröbner basis computation procedure

Lemma 1 and Proposition 1 suggest a natural way of computing a Gröbner
basis of a regular CheapLunch system {P, Q}. The idea is to first compute a
Gröbner basis for Qtop over the subring F[x1 , . . . , xm ], which can then be lifted
to a Gröbner basis for (P, Q) in the larger ring R. We proceed as follows:


                                               13
 1. Compute homogeneous polynomials {fij } ⊂ F[x1 , . . . , xm ] such that
                                              
                                 Xm           
                      G(Qtop ) =      fij Qtop
                                            j
                                              
                                        j=1
                                                      1≤i≤g

    forms a reduced Gröbner basis for Qtop .
 2. Using {fij }, multiply with the respective Qj -polynomials to compute the set
                                                 
                                     X m         
                            G(Q) =         fij Qj        .
                                                 
                                       j=1
                                                   1≤i≤g

 3. Return G(Q) ∪ P as a Gröbner basis for the full system.

3.4   Complexity estimates
We now estimate the complexity of the method described in Section 3.3. We will
assume that the system {P, Q} can be efficiently computed and fully reduced
according to the relevant weighted order ≺ for any given instance, as is required
by Lemma 1. In particular, this means that for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m and 1 ≤ j ≤ n, we
have degyi (Qj ) < αi (as the monomials of higher yi -degree can be reduced by the
leading monomial of Pi ). A similar task has been studied and estimated under
the name of sysGen in [8, Section 3], and we expect their work to translate
to our use cases in a straightforward manner. The analysis of [8] further shows
that, with a few minor exceptions, sysGen does not form the bottleneck of an
attack, and we expect the same to hold in our case.

Step 1. The first step of our procedure consists of computing a Gröbner basis
of Qtop over F[x1 , . . . , xm ], i.e., a homogeneous system of m equations in m
variables. To estimate the complexity of this step, we can readily use Equation (2)
with n = m (determined case):
                                                   wdreg +m
                                                             !ω
                                             ω
                 C1 = (SD(wdreg ; (w, 1))) ≈      Qmm           ,
                                                     i=1 wi


where wdreg is the weighted degree of regularity of Qtop (Definition 4). As we are
already assuming that Qtop is regular by applying this procedure, we can upper
bound wdreg by the Macaulay bound (4). If we further assume that this system
is also in SNP (Definition 6), we may also use the stronger bound of Theorem 1.

Step 2. The second step performs polynomial multiplications between the co-
efficients fij of the elements of G(Qtop ) in terms of the original generating set
Qtop and the Qi polynomials, recalling that G(Qtop ) is reduced and that all
Qj -polynomials have been properly reduced by the Pi ’s according to ≺. If we


                                        14
let A := {0, . . . , α1 − 1} × · · · × {0, . . . , αn − 1} ⊂ Nn , we can then write these
Qj -polynomials as follows:
                                    X
                            Qj =        Qj,a (x1 , . . . , xm ) · ya ,
                                 a∈A
                                                         Qn
and it is easy to see that there are at most |A| = j=1 αj terms Qj,a in the
sum. To compute each fij · Qj , we first compute the individual products fij ·
Qj,a (x1 , . . . , xm ) for each a ∈ A and sum them together. From the definition of
the weighted degree of regularity, we know that
                      wdeg(fij · Qj,a (x1 , . . . , xm )) ≤ wdreg .
                                                              Qn
Thus, the second step amounts to performing mg · ( j=1 αj ) multiplications
of polynomials in m variables whose result has weighted degree at most wdreg ,
where g is the size of the reduced Gröbner basis G(Qtop ). Using [28, Corollary
2.1], this latter quantity can be upper bounded by m · D⟨Qtop ⟩ . To estimate the
complexity of each of the multiplications, we make use of the following result:
Theorem 3 (Multivariate multiplication [46]). Let P1 , P2 ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xm ]
such that wdeg(P1 ) + wdeg(P2 ) ≤ D. Let assume that F has at least D points in
arithmetic progression. Then we can compute the product P1 · P2 in time:
         O (m · M (D)/D · SD(D; (w, 1))) = O(m · M (SD(D; (w, 1)))) ,
where
                                                       m
                          (                                                )
                                                                                  D+m
                                                                                      
                                                       X
                                                   m
    SD(D; (w, 1)) = # (a1 , . . . , am ) ∈ N                 wi · ai ≤ D       ≃ Qmm
                                                       i=1                        i=1 wi

is the number of terms of weight at most D from Equation (1), and
                           M (d) = O(d · log(d) log log(d))
is the time complexity for multiplying univariate polynomials of degree d.
Applying this result to our case with D = wdreg yields the following complexity
bound for the second step:
                                       n
                                       Y
                 C2 = m3 D⟨Qtop ⟩ ·          αj · M (SD(wdreg ; (w, 1))),
                                       j=1

where SD(wdreg ; (w, 1)) is given in Equation (1).
                                                                          Qn
Cost comparison. Note that the cost of Step 1. does not depend on j=1 αj ,
while the cost of Step 2. only grows linearly with it. This is in contrast to the
                                                         Qn        ω
change of ordering step, whose cost will grow with         j=1 αj    . As such, we
expect that this method will allow us to significantly reduce the cost of Gröbner
basis computation for several instances of ZK-friendly primitives, and that it
will transfer the bottleneck of the overall attack to the change of ordering step.
Examples of this will be given in Section 4.


                                              15
3.5   Change of ordering step
It remains to estimate the complexity of the change of ordering, whose cost has
already been stated to be polynomial in DI in Section 2.4. To do so, we instan-
tiate more fine-grained bounds from the computer algebra literature and/or we
slightly improve them using the CheapLunch particularities.
    We start by recalling some known results for converting a Gröbner basis from
the wgrevlex ordering to the lex ordering in the zero-dimensional case. Most al-
gorithms for this purpose work as follows: we define the F-linear maps Txi over
R/I as P 7→ xi · P (mod I), represented as a DI × DI matrix in F for some basis
of R/I. It is known that the characteristic polynomial of Txn lies in the ideal I.
Hence, by computing this characteristic polynomial and finding its root(s), we
recover the n-th coordinate of a solution. Computing the characteristic polyno-
mial of Txn is done in two steps: first, choose a basis of R/I and compute the
matrices of the Txi under this choice of basis. Those matrices are known as mul-
tiplication matrices. Then, compute the characteristic polynomial of Txn using
linear algebra algorithms. While the second step has received a lot of attention
in the computer algebra community [21,24,13], the first step was less studied
since it is free under the stability property that is expected for generic systems.
However, this property is not verified by our systems. The first work tackling the
multiplication matrix computation is the original FGLM paper [23], that gives
a complexity in O(n · DI3 ) where n is the number of variables. With a refined
complexity analysis, we show in Appendix C.1 that under the stability and SNP
assumption of the Qtop , and if the weights of the xi ’s w.r.t. ≺ are all equal to wx
for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, the computation of all multiplication matrices in the CheapLunch
case would have a complexity of
                                   (n + m) · DI3 · wx
                                                     
                             O                          .                          (7)
                                      deg≺ (Qm )
    A more recent work [27] leverages fast linear algebra to compute the multi-
plication matrices in time O(dmax · nω DIω ), where dmax is the maximal degree of
elements in the canonical basis of R/I and n is the number of variables. We adapt
this algorithm
          Pn+m to weighted orderings and refine its analysis in Appendix C.2. Let
wdmax ≤ i=1 (di − wi ) be the maximal weighted degree of monomials in the
canonical basis of R/I; if the weights wi are integer, the complexity for the
computation of the multiplication matrix for CLS is:

                           O wd3−ω            ω−1 ω
                                                     
                                  max (n + m)     DI .                        (8)

The choice of the best multiplication matrices computation algorithm among (7)
and (8) depends on the parameters of the CLS.
   Then, we use more recent algorithms than FGLM to compute the desired
characteristic polynomial (for a detailed discussion on these algorithms, see Ap-
pendix C). Among them, the Hermite Normal Form (HNF) algorithm [13] pro-
vides the characteristic polynomial of Txm in time

          O(tω                      2                            ω−1
                                                                     
              m M (DI /tm )(log(tm ) + log(DI /tm ))) = Õ DI · tm     ,      (9)


                                         16
where tm is a sparsity indicator of this multiplication matrix. More precisely,
the matrix Txm has two sets of columns: those which come from the identity
matrix, thus only containing one nonzero entry, and those which are dense or
close to dense. The parameter tm is the number of these dense columns. It
is shown in Appendix C that for a CheapLunch system and under the SNP
and stability assumptions for Q, and if the wt≺ (xi ) = wx for 1 ≤ i ≤ m and
a certain weight wx , the multiplication matrix Txm has a sparsity indicator
tm ≤ 2DI wx /deg≺ (Qm ). Taking ω = 2 and neglecting logarithmic factors in
Equation (9) as a conservative estimate from a designer’s point of view, we get
the following lower bound on the complexity:

                             DI2 wt≺ (xm )/deg≺ (Qm ) .                       (10)

Note that this conservative bound also roughly corresponds to the number of
non-zero coefficients in the multiplication matrix. We will use (8) with ω = 2.807
as a realistic complexity estimate from an attacker’s point of view. In contrast,
the estimate (10) will be used as a worst case scenario from the designer’s point
of view.


4     Primitives with Regular CheapLunch Systems
We now apply the framework of Section 3 to CheapLunch systems arising from
AO hash functions that are assumed to be regular (i.e., for which the part
Qtop is regular) from Hilbert series experiments (see Remark 1). While being
weighted regular is a generic property [26, Proposition 4], we have no way to
prove regularity for Qtop apart from proving its Hilbert series.

4.1     XHash8
XHash8 [2] is a permutation derived from Rescue-Prime Optimized (RPO) [4]
that is defined over F12                                             64  32
                      p , where p is the so-called Goldilocks prime 2 − 2 + 1.
It is designed to be used in a sponge construction with rate 8 and capacity 4,
and was originally defined alongside another permutation called XHash12. The
particularity of XHash8 is that some of its nonlinear layers are partial: they
only activate 8 out of 12 branches. It is for that reason that our framework
directly applies to XHash8, and not to its siblings Rescue, Rescue-Prime, RPO
and XHash12. Using the notations of the original XHash paper, we decompose
XHash8 into the following 10 steps:

                  (F )(B ′ )(P 3)(F )(B ′ )(P 3)(F )(B ′ )(P 3)(M C),

where
 – the (F ) step is an affine layer followed by the application of x 7→ x7 to the
   whole state,
 – the (B ′ ) step is an affine layer followed by the application of x 7→ x /7 to 8
                                                                           1


   out of 12 branches of the state,

                                          17
 – the (P 3) step is a constant injection followed by the mapping of the 12 Fp
   elements to 4 Fp3 elements8 , which are then raised to the 7-th power:
           (s0 , . . . , s11 ) 7→ (S0 , S1 , S2 , S3 ) 7→ (S07 , S17 , S27 , S37 ) 7→ (s′0 , . . . , s′11 ).
     Altogether, this step can be represented as a polynomial of total degree 7
     over F12
           p , which we use in the construction of polynomial models of XHash8.

For a figure of the round function, see Appendix 4.

CICO-(12 − k, k) model for XHash8 (no round skip). We use the same system
as the authors of the Freelunch [7, Section 4.3 and Appendix A], expanded to
CICO-(12 − k, k). In other words, we have k input variables x1 , . . . , xk , and as
many intermediate variables as there are x 7→ x /7 Sboxes: for the j-th (B ′ ) step,
                                                      1


we define y1,j , . . . , y8,j at the output of these Sboxes, lexicographically higher
than all previously defined variables. We give the following weights to these
variables:
                          wt(xi ) = 1      for 1 ≤ i ≤ k,
                         wt(yi,j ) = 72j−2 for 1 ≤ i ≤ 8, 1 ≤ j ≤ 3.
Then, the full system is a CheapLunch system that contains, for 1 ≤ i ≤ 8,
                                                         7
1 ≤ j ≤ 24, a polynomial Pi,j of leading monomial yi,j      , and for 1 ≤ i ≤ k,
                                 top                    6
a polynomial Qi such that Qi has weighted degree 7 and is in F[x1 , . . . , xk ].
Indeed, at the j-th (B ′ ) step, we introduce new monomials y1,j , . . . , y8,j of weight
72j−2 on branches that contain an Sbox, and the branches that don’t have an
Sbox contain polynomials whose top homogeneous part is in F[x1 , . . . , xk ] and
has weight 72j−1 . From Theorem 2, we directly get the following bound on DI
for solving CICO-(12 − k, k):
                                              DI ≤ 724+6k .
Finally, notice that Qtop is generated by k homogeneous polynomials of degree
76 in k variables. We can use Theorem 1 (which is in fact the classical Macaulay
bound in this context) and get that
                                       wdreg ≤ k(76 − 1) + 1.

Experimental results. We verified our approach experimentally on versions of
XHash8 with less rounds and less branches. Our results are summarized in Ta-
ble 9. Let nS be the number of Sboxes in (B ′ ) (so, nS = 8 for the full XHash8).
In our experiments, we have noted that whenever t < nS + k, then the ideal gen-
erated by Qtop does not have dimension 0. However, as long as nS + k ≤ t, our
assumptions work well and the bound on DI is tight. Note that the full sponge
used for XHash has capacity 4, therefore it is sufficient to solve CICO-(8, 4) to
break the scheme, and we conjecture that Qtop has dimension 0 in this case, as
nS + c = t. We believe that CICO-(7, 5) and CICO-(6, 6) are still of academic
interest, but arguably less so.
8
    To define this map, one must choose a “representation” of Fp3 – in other words, an
    irreducible polynomial of degree 3 in Fp . The authors of XHash do not give that
    polynomial: instead, they give the algebraic normal form of (P 3) in [2, Appendix A].


                                                      18
About Conjecture 1 of [2]. A conjecture is given in the paper where XHash is
defined. The authors call it the “Monotonous Ideal Degree Conjecture”. With
our notations, this conjecture translates to, for solving any CICO-(12 − k, k),
DI ≥ 730 . It comes from the leading monomials of the form yi,j    7
                                                                      for each (P ′ )
                                         6
layer Sbox, and a leading monomial x7i for some i in Q. This intuition is true
in our case, assuming that Q is regular, following Proposition 1. Indeed, we get
                        7
that the monomials yi,j    are leading monomials in the reduced Gröbner basis of
⟨P, Q⟩, and all other leading monomials come from G(Q). The leading monomials
of G(Q) are those of G(Qtop ), which must have, for all i, a leading monomial
                6
divisible by x7i , as Qtop is homogeneous of degree 76 . Thus, we get the following:

Proposition 2. We can define a CheapLunch system Q, P to solve CICO-(12−
k, k) instances of XHash8 for k ≤ 4, and assuming that Q is regular, its ideal
degree can be bounded by:
                             730 ≤ DI ≤ 724+6k ,
which validates Conjecture 1 of [2] in this context (without round skips).

On round skips. We refer to [5, Appendix D] and D.1 for the round skip method,
as XHash falls exactly in this framework. With this, we find that for CICO-1
and CICO-2, we can skip the first (F ) layer, and respectively 9 Sboxes (8 for
XHash8) and 2 Sboxes of the first (P ′ ) layer. For CICO-3 and CICO-4, we expect
that it would decrease the degree of the ideal respectively by 72 and 7.

4.2    Poseidon and Neptune
Polynomial modeling In this section, we describe a polynomial modeling
for the CICO problem on both Poseidon and Neptune, that will feature a
CheapLunch structure and get us a tight upper bound on the ideal degree. We
recall that both primitives are defined as:

        E (RF ) ◦ · · · ◦ E (Rf,1 +1) ◦ I (RP ) ◦ . . . I (1) ◦ E (Rf,1 ) ◦ · · · ◦ E (1) ◦ ME ,

where we let RF = Rf,1 + Rf,2 , the E (i) are permutations of degree d for Posei-
                                                                             (j)
don and 4 for Neptune, and I (j) are defined as I (j) (x) = MI ·SI (x)+CI , with
SI (x) = (xd1 , x2 , . . . , xt ). As our analysis of Poseidon and Neptune in sponge
mode will be similar, we set δ the degree of the full rounds of the primitive (ie.
δ = d for Poseidon and δ = 4 for Neptune). We define a polynomial modeling
of the CICO-(t − k, k) problem as follows:
 – We let k + RP variables (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yRP ). We let the input of the
   permutation to be (x1 , . . . , xk , 0, . . . , 0). The state of the permutation after
   the first Rf,1 full rounds becomes
                                (0)                           (0)
                             (R1 (x1 , . . . , xk ), . . . , Rt (x1 , . . . , xk ))
                    (0)
      where the Ri        have total degree δ Rf,1 in the xj .


                                                   19
 – Let 1 ≤ i ≤ RP , we define polynomials Pi (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yi ) as follows:
          (i)                                               (i)
   let (R1 (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yi−1 ), . . . , Rt (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yi−1 )) the state
   after the i-th partial round, we let
                                                                          (i−1)
            Pi (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yi ) = yi − R1                         (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) .
    Thus, the state after the partial nonlinear layer becomes
                                                 (i−1)                               (i−1)
                                   (yid , R2             (x, y), . . . , Rt                  (x, y)) ,
                                    (i)
    and we can get the polynomials Rj by multiplying this vector with MI and
                                (i)
   adding the round constant C .
                                                  (R )               (R )
 – After all partial rounds, we get the state (R1 P (x, y), . . . , Rt P (x, y)). By
   applying the last Rf,2 full rounds, we get a state (Q1 (x, y), . . . , Qt (x, y))
   and add the equations Q1 (x, y), . . . , Qk (x, y) to the system. Finally, the
   ideal corresponding to the CICO problem is:
                                        I = ⟨P1 , . . . , PRP , Q1 , . . . , Qk ⟩ .

Monomial ordering. We give the following weights to the variables:
 – wt(xj ) = d for 1 ≤ j ≤ k.
 – wt(yi ) = δ Rf,1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ RP .
                                                                                                                            (i)
The weights have been chosen such that the weighted degree of the state Rj , 1 ≤
j ≤ t, 0 ≤ i ≤ RP stays upper bounded by d · δ Rf,1 through the partial rounds.
Moreover, we order the variables in such a way that, for monomials with an
equal weight: y1 ≻ · · · ≻ yRP ≻ x1 ≻ · · · ≻ xk .


     x1                      (0)                                  (1)
                            R1 (x1 , x2 )   xd     y1d          R1 (x1 , x2 , y1 )     xd     y2d                            Q1

     x2                      (0)                                  (1)
                            R2 (x1 , x2 )                       R2 (x1 , x2 , y1 )                                           Q2

      0
             Rf,1            (0)
                            R3 (x1 , x2 )
                                                           MI
                                                                  (1)
                                                                R3 (x1 , x2 , y1 )
                                                                                                    MI       Rf,2
                             (0)                                  (1)
      0                     R4 (x1 , x2 )                       R4 (x1 , x2 , y1 )




               Fig. 1. The polynomial modeling in the case k = 2, RP = 2.




A CheapLunch structure We prove that the system we defined has a Cheap-
Lunch structure. Indeed, after replacing Pi with NF≻,⟨P1 ,...,Pi−1 ⟩ (Pi ) and the
Qj with NF≻,⟨P1 ,...,PRP ⟩ (Qj ) (which can be done efficiently during the system
generation), we get a polynomial system with the following properties:
 – Qtop
    j
                                 d
        ∈ Fp [x1 , . . . , xk , yR P
                                     ] for 1 ≤ j ≤ k, and P1top ∈ Fp [x1 , . . . , xk ].
         top       d
 – LM(Pj ) = yj−1 for 2 ≤ j ≤ RP .
Thus, setting P = {P2 , . . . , PRP }, Q = {P1 , Q1 , . . . , Qc }, we get a CheapLunch
system. We also made extensive tests to check the regularity of the system, and
all of them succeeded (see the parameters we verified in Table 4).


                                                                20
Evaluating the weighted degree of regularity To compute the complexity
of the Gröbner basis computation, we have to estimate the weighted degree of
regularity of the system, as defined in Definition 4. The system Q contains k
equations of weight d · δ RF and 1 equation of weight d · δ Rf,1 in k variables of
weight d and one of weight δ Rf,1 . Thus, applying the weighted Macaulay bound
with the SNP assumption yields:
                wdreg ≤ d · k(δ RF − 1) + (δ Rf,1 − δ Rf,1 /d) + 1 .
                                                                  

   However, we have seen that for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k, Qtop    j
                                                                                       d
                                                              ∈ Fp [x1 , . . . , xk , yR P
                                                                                           ].
                                       d                     Rf,1
Thus, we can set a new variable ỹ = yR  P
                                           of   weight d · δ      . Such an    operation
does not change the degree of regularity of the ideal, and applying the same
bound on the new system yields:
    wdreg ≤ d · k(δ RF − 1) + (δ Rf,1 − δ Rf,1 ) + 1 = d · k(δ RF − 1) + 1 .
                                                                                 

This bound is matched in our experiments. For instance, the estimates from
Section 3.4 yield a Gröbner basis for Poseidon in time:
                        ω
            k · dRF + 2                                           k · dRF + 2
                                                                          
      1                         3    k·RF +RP −1          1
                            + k   · d            · M                             .
    dRf,1       k+1                                    dRf,1 −1       k+1

Ideal degree To evaluate precisely the degree of the ideal, we make use of the
weighted Bézout bound as stated in Theorem 2. We have that the equations Qi
have weighted degree d·δ RF , and the equations Pj have weighted degree d·δ Rf,1 .
Moreover, the variables xi have weight d and the variables yj have weight δ Rf,1 .
The weighted Bézout bound yields:
           DI ≤ (d · δ RF )k · (d · δ Rf,1 )RP /(δ RP ·Rf,1 · dk ) = δ k·RF · dRP .
We conjecture that this bound is achieved.
   Note that a similar result for Poseidon has already been reported in [11,
Section 10.1], where the ideal degree of the CICO-k problem was evaluated as
                                 DI = dk·(RF −2)+RP +1 .
To the best of our knowledge, the authors of this report did not publish any
proof of it. The difference between this result and ours comes from the fact they
considered Poseidon instances with only RF − 1 full rounds and starting with
a layer of monomials instead of a linear layer.

Skipping rounds on Poseidon Following [9], our attacks on Poseidon can
be improved by tricks allowing to skip the first rounds, and thus reduce the
ideal degree. In general, it is feasible reduce the degree in the first s = ⌊t/k⌋ − 2
variables xi of the polynomials by a factor d, reducing the ideal degree by a factor
ds . Additionally, some instances of Poseidon2 use non-MDS matrices, which
may make this round-skipping trick more efficient than expected. We observed
for instance that in the case t = 16, k = 1, two rounds can be freely skipped
using the ME matrix from Poseidon2. We leave as an open problem a further
study of this phenomena. Full details are provided in Appendix D.1.


                                             21
Comparison to previous cryptanalysis of CICO-k

Comparison to [3] We report in Table 2 a comparison between our attacks and
a previous Gröbner basis cryptanalysis on very high security level instances. We
recall that their instances have been generated using p ∼ 2128 , c = λ/128, t = 3·c
to ensure λ bits of security against CICO-c attacks (but only λ/2 bits of security
against collision attacks or 2-block preimage attacks in sponge mode). The round
numbers have then been generated using the formulas from the Poseidon design
paper taking into account the security margin. For each instance, we have added
two rows depending on the complexity estimate we consider for the change of
ordering step (we use (8) when taking into account the complexity for generating
the multiplication matrix, and (10) corresponds to a conservative choice from
the designers’ point of view). We discard the column on the univariate solving
step as it is never a bottleneck in our or their attack.


         λ        d     t    k     RF     RP       GB        FGLM       source
                                                 712.98     705.67        [3]
       1024       3    24    8      8     85                673.32       (8)
                                                 367.94
                                                            456.47       (10)
                                                 430.71      615.40       [3]
        512       5    12    4      8     57                 588.25      (8)
                                                 303.81
                                                            390.08       (10)
                                                 351.56      593.25       [3]
        384       7     9    3      8     47                 566.46      (8)
                                                 287.81
                                                            370.57       (10)
        256       3    49    7      6     46     219.30     253.59       (10)
             Table 2. Comparison with [3] on high security level instances.




Comparison to designers’ analysis Using conservative estimates from the de-
signers’ point of view, we compared our estimates to the expected security level
for full Poseidon with no security margin (ie. RF = 6, and no margin on RP ),
taking ω = 2 which corresponds to a conservative choice from a designer point
of view. Our analysis using (10) outperforms their analysis for some 256 bit
instances (DI2 /dRF ≃ 2253.59 on the full version, without security margin). We
emphasize that even with ω = 2, we found no attacks on full Poseidon with its
security margin for realistic security levels (80 ≤ λ ≤ 256).

Comparison to [36] This article exploits some invariant subspace property in
the internal rounds to reduce the degree of the equations compared to a trivial


                                          22
forward modeling of Poseidon. In particular, they find a linear subspace S (ℓ) ⊂
Ftp of dimension k such that for 0 ≤ r ≤ ℓ − 1, y ∈ S (ℓ) , we have that
                            (MIr y) · (1, 0, . . . , 0) = 0 .
This way, we can skip the first ℓ partial rounds, which will reduce the degree of
the equations by dℓ . While the authors evaluated the complexity of the Gröbner
basis step by making some tradeoffs in the generic complexity formula for grevlex
Gröbner basis, they also provided a conjecture on the ideal degree achieved by
their modeling. They conjectured [36, Conjecture 1] that
                               DI = dt·Rf,1 +RP −ℓ .
Note that the authors made their experiments using Rf,1 = Rf,2 = Rf . Using a
similar analysis as we did for our modeling, we could prove the following bound:
                          DI ≤ dkRF +RP +Rf,1 (t−2k)−ℓ .
We see that their ideal degree is lower than ours only if s ≤ ℓ − Rf,1 (t − 2k). As
s ≥ 0 and Rf,1 > 0, this would imply that ℓ > (t − 2k). The case ℓ > (t − 2k)
corresponds to the case where a nontrivial invariant subspace exists for MI ,
which is avoided in the new Poseidon instances.
   Thus, our modeling leads to a lower ideal degree than theirs. Moreover, we
have shown that the Gröbner basis computation step has negligible complexity
compared to the change of ordering step for most sets of parameters, which was
not the case in their work. This implies the following complexity comparison:
                      CGB,ours ≤ CFGLM,ours ≤ CFGLM,[36] .

4.3   Neptune in compression mode
While Neptune has originally been intended for use in sponge mode, a recent
work [36] has considered its security in compression mode, and provided an
attack exploiting the low degree of the inverse of full rounds. We recall that
the compression mode they considered for a permutation P : Ftp → Ftp is defined
as x 7→ Trunck (x + P (x)), where Trunck returns the first k coordinates of its
input. In this section, we show that our framework can greatly improve their
results by computing a Gröbner basis efficiently, in a way similar to the previous
subsection, and providing precise bounds for the ideal degree of the system.
   More precisely, if we let ℓ = t − k the length of the subspace trail in the
partial rounds, Rf,1 (resp. Rf,2 ) the number of full rounds in the input (resp.
output) side of the permutation, we provide a modeling of a preimage attack
whose ideal degree is upper bounded as:
                         DI ≤ dRP −ℓ · 4(k−1)·Rf,1 +Rf,2 .
as long as Rf,1 ≥ Rf,2 and RP ≥ ℓ + ⌊logd (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋ + 1 (which is the case
for any realistic set of parameters). Note that this upper bound matches the
results from [36, Table 10], i.e. it corresponds to the ideal degrees they observed
for RP ≥ 4 (this condition corresponds exactly to the one we required for our
bound to be true).

                                          23
Polynomial modeling We model the preimage on the compression function
as follows:
1. We recall the subspace trail technique from [15]: We let e1 , . . . , ek ∈ Ftp a
   basis of the vector space {v ∈ Ftp | MIj · v ∈ {0} × Ft−1
                                                         p , 0 ≤ j ≤ t − k − 1}.
                                                Pk
   Setting the state before partial rounds as i=1 xi · ei allows the state after
   ℓ = t − k partial rounds to be linear in the xi (as this space avoids the xd
   through t − k rounds). We set wt(xi ) = d.
2. In a similar way as for Poseidon, we introduce variables yj in the input of
   the j-th partial round xd , when ℓ + 1 ≤ j ≤ RP − ⌊logd (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋ − 1.
                                                                             (j−1)
   We set their weight to wt(yj ) = 1. This adds polynomials Pj = yj − R1          ,
            (j−1)
   where R1       is a polynomial representing the first coordinate of the state
   vector before the j-th partial round.
3. We add an additional variable y in the input of the RP −⌊logd (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋-th
   round xd . We set its weight to
                                                4Rf,1 −Rf,2
                                  wt(y) =               R   −Rf,2        .
                                            d⌊logd (4 f,1           )⌋

                                              (R −⌊log (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋−1)
   This adds a polynomial P = y − R1 P           d
                                                                .
4. We apply the ⌊logd (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋ last partial rounds, and Rf,2 full rounds in
   the forward direction to get the first k output words of the permutation.
   Likewise, we apply the Rf,1 full rounds in the backward direction to get the
   first k input words. Summing the input and output gets us the equations
   Q1 , . . . , Qk corresponding to being a preimage of the compression function.

A CheapLunch structure Our system is as follows:
 – k variables xi of weight d, RP − ⌊logd (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋ − ℓ − 1 variables yj of
                                                               Rf,1 −Rf,2
   weight 1 and one variable y of weight 4Rf,1 −Rf,2 /d⌊logd (4           )⌋
                                                                             .
                                Rf ,1
 – k equations Qi of weight 4         · d, whose homogeneous component of highest
   weight only depends on x2 , . . . , xk , y.
 – The equation Pℓ+1 , whose leading monomial is x1 .
               d
 – LM(Pj ) = yj−1    for ℓ + 2 ≤ j ≤ RP − ⌊logd (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋ − 1 and LM(P ) =
    d
   yR −⌊log (4Rf,1 −Rf,2 )⌋−1 .
      P     d



Ideal degree It follows from the weighted Bézout bound and from what we
observed in the previous paragraph, that:
                            DI ≤ dRP −ℓ · 4(k−1)·Rf,1 +Rf,2 .

Gröbner basis computation We have seen that the system has a CheapLunch
structure. In addition to this structure, we can observe that the top parts of the
Qi are of the form:
                                      R    −Rf,2
                              ⌊logd (4 f,1       )⌋+1
                                                        ·4Rf,2
                Qtop
                 i   = µi · y d                                  + Q̃i (x2 , . . . xk ) ,


                                              24
where at least one µi ̸= 0. Thus, taking a monomial ordering such that xi ≺ y ≺
yj , we can, up to an invertible Fp -linear transform of the Qi , get to:
                                 Rf,1 −Rf,2
                      ⌊logd (4              )⌋+1
                                                   ·4Rf,2
      LM(Q1 ) = y d                                         , Qtop
                                                               i   ∈ Fp [x2 , . . . , xk ] , 2 ≤ i ≤ k .

Hence, we get a new CheapLunch structure where Q = {Qi | 2 ≤ i ≤ k} is a
system with k − 1 equations of weight d · 4Rf,1 in x2 , . . . , xk . Using Theorem 1,
we get
                      wdreg ≤ d · ((k − 1) · 4Rf,1 + 1) .
This bound matches the one we observe experimentally.


5     Non-Regular Examples
We now move on to CheapLunch systems that do not follow Definition 9. In other
words, Qtop is not regular, so that we can no longer rely on the arguments used
to prove Lemma 1. In particular, the computation of the Gröbner basis of Q may
feature non-trivial cancellation in the top parts of the polynomials, which we refer
to as degree fall polynomials. Thus, the Gröbner basis may contain polynomials
that are not in P, but such that some yi divides its leading monomial. This
prevents us from applying the strategy from Section 3 directly to our system.
    In this section, we report our observations on these systems and give some
proven and conjectured upper bounds on the associated ideal degree. We leave as
an open problem a more efficient computation of the first Gröbner basis in this
case. In the meantime, we advise the designers to consider the change-of-order
step as the most costly and to use these conjectured bounds for its estimation.

5.1     Griffin
The Griffin hash function was introduced at Crypto 2023 [31]. While several
full-round instances have been broken in the k = 1 case [7,8], no cryptanalysis
has been done for the case where k > 1. In what follows, we propose a new
modeling for the CICO-k problem when k > 1. This modeling provides an upper
bound on the ideal degree, that we observed to be not tight. We also made,
based on our observation a conjecture on the actual ideal degree of the system.
We leave as an interesting open problem a proof of Conjecture 1 as well as finding
efficient ways of computing a Gröbner basis.

Specification of Griffin The Griffin round function is defined as a compo-
sition of three steps:
                                                                      1/d
 1. A partial-SPN step (x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xt ) 7→ (x1 , xd2 , x3 , . . . , xt ) where d > 1
    is minimal such that gcd(p − 1, d) = 1.
 2. A Horst layer that maps xi to xi if i = 1, 2, xi · G1 (x1 , x2 , 0) if i = 3 and
    xi · Gi−2 (x1 , x2 , xi−1 ) when i > 3, where the Gi are quadratic functions that
    never equal 0.

                                                        25
 3. An affine layer defined using a matrix M and round constants c(i) .

The round function is also represented in Figure 5. Note that the permutation
applies a linear layer before the first round. The round numbers of full instances
of Griffin can be found in [31].


Proving an upper bound on DI We introduce for each round 1 ≤ i ≤ R
intermediate variables yi , zi , where yi lies in the input of the xd and zi in the
output of x1/d . We also set wt(yi ) = wt(zi ) = 3i−1 /d, 1 ≤ i ≤ R, and xj , 1 ≤
j ≤ k on the branches of the unknown input, with wt(xj ) = 1. From the cubic
                                                                 (i)
Horst layer, we can easily prove that at each round, wdeg(Rj ) = 3i−1 , thus:

                       (i)                        (i)
       wdeg(zid − R1 ) = wdeg(yi − R2 ) = 3i−1 ,                        wdeg(Qj ) = 3R .

                                                                              (i)      (i)
Applying the weighted Bézout bound (5) to the system {zid − R1 , yi − R2 | 1 ≤
i ≤ R} ∪ {Qj | 1 ≤ j ≤ k} gives:
                                                          R
                                       DI ≤ d2 · 3k            .

Note that this bound is not tight even for k = 1, it has been proven in [7] that
                                    R
in this setting, DI = (d · (2d + 1)) . Based on our experiments with differing
values of k, d, we make the following conjecture:

Conjecture 1. The ideal degree of an R-round Griffin CICO-k problem is upper
bounded by
                                                R
                         DI ≤ d · d(3k − 1) + 1     .


5.2   ArionHash

ArionHash is an arithmetization oriented hash function proposed in [44]. Similar
to Griffin, the underlying permutation uses inversion on one branch of its non-
linear layer, and low degree functions on the other branches. The constructions
follows the so called Generalized Triangular Dynamical System (GTDS) formu-
lation [43]. ArionHash instantiates, in sponge mode, the permutation Arion-π
which we briefly recall below. Let p ≥ 5 be a prime, t the number of branches,
e the smallest positive integer such that gcd(e, p − 1) = 1, and 121 ≤ α ≤ 257
an integer such that gcd(α, p − 1) = 1. For 1 ≤ i ≤ t − 1, let δi,1 , δi,2 , µi ∈ Fq
be such that gi (x) = x2 + δi,1 · x + δi,2 is a quadratic function without zeroes
in Fq and define hi (x) = x2 + µi · x. Then the non-linear layer of Arion-π is
F = {f1 , . . . , ft }, where each fi is defined “from-right-to-left” by the equations:

                                       1/α
              ft (y1 , . . . , yt ) = yt     ,
                                                                                             (11)
              fi (y1 , . . . , yt ) = yie · gi (σi,t ) + hi (σi,t ),   t−1≥i≥0


                                                  26
where σi,t represents the sum of all previously computed inputs and outputs
                                     t
                                     X
                           σi,t =            yj + fj (y1 , . . . , yt ).
                                    j=i+1

    The permutation Arion-π is defined as follows, where L⟩ is an affine function
defined as in [44, Definition 3]

            Arion-π : Ftp −→ Ftp ,         x 7−→ Lr ◦ Fr · · · L1 ◦ F1 ◦ L0 (x)       (12)

Polynomial Modeling Consider the CICO-k problem for ArionHash, where
                                                                      (i)      (i)
we write the input state as (x1 , ..., xk , 0t−k ). Let us denote by Lj , and Fj the
value on branch j after Li and Fi , respectively. For i-th round, we introduce
intermediate variable yi on the last branch and the corresponding equation
                                     (i−1)
                     Pi := yiα − Lt          (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yi−1 )   (13)

The CICO-k constraints on the final output will yield polynomials Q1 , . . . , Qk
of degree (2t−1 (e + 1) − e)r . Assigning the weights wt(xi ) = 1, 1 ≤ i ≤ k and
                     (i−1)
wt(yi ) = deg(Lt           ), 1 ≤ i ≤ r gives us the system P = {P2 , . . . , Pr }, Q =
{Q1 , . . . , Qk } in the CheapLunch form

Explaining non-regularity With the above weighted monomial order the
polynomials of P = {P2 , . . . , Pr } will have co-prime leading monomials. However,
the homogeneous component of the highest weight of Q, that is Qtop                    top
                                                                         1 , . . . , Qk
will not be regular. This because the highest degree terms of all polynomi-
als will be constant multiples of the same state element from previous round.
More concretely, the state after the non-linear layer of the last round will be
   (r)         (r)
(F1 , . . . , Ft ). After the final linear layer, the output will be linear combina-
tion of these state elements. So, for 1 ≤ j ≤ k we have

                            t
                            X
                                        (r)
                     Qj =         cj,m Fm   (x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yr )      (14)
                            m=1

where we omit the round constant addition for simplicity, We see (for instance
from [44, Lemma 2] that deg(F1r ) > deg(F2r ) > . . . > deg(Ftr ). The highest de-
                                                                              (r)
gree component of each of Q1 , . . . , Qk will be the highest degree term of F1 , and
we have trivial relations involving the Qi ’s. For example, denoting by T op(p(x))
the homogeneous component of highest degree of some polynomial p, we have

                             Qtop
                              1    Qtop       (r)
                                  = 2 = T op(F1 ) .                                   (15)
                             c1,1   c2,1
As a result, condition 1 of Definition 5 will not be satisfied and hence the system
will not be regular. We can cancel out this common term from, say Q2 by a


                                                27
linear combination and define Q̄2 , which will now have the highest degree term
        (r)
from F2 , while Q1 remains the same. Essentially, we have eliminated the higher
                                                          (r)                         (r)
degree terms in Q2 that are constant multiples of F1 (and not just T op(F1 )),
                    top   top            top      top
and we still have ⟨Q1 , Q2 ⟩ = ⟨Q1 , Q̄2 ⟩. In fact, we can generalize this for
k > 2, and perform similar linear transformations pair by pair for Qtop                 top
                                                                          1 , . . . , Qk ,
                               top              top
after which we get Qtop1 , Q̄2     , . . . , Q¯k , that still generate the same ideal.
When we replace deg(Qj ) with deg(Q̄j ) for j = 2, . . . , k, in the Weighted Bézout
Bound (2), we get the following upper bound for the ideal degree
                                        Qk
                                    αr ( j=1 deg(Q̄j ))
                               DI ≤      Qr                                           (16)
                                           j=1 wj

where wj are the monomial weights and it can be shown, following induction
argument similar to [44, Appendix C.1] that

          deg(Q̄j ) = deg(Fjr ) = (2t−1 (e + 1) − e)(r−1) · (2t−j (e + 1) − e)

Note that since Q1 , . . . , Qk were initially of degree (2t−1 (e+1)−e)r we improved
the Weighted Bézout Bound by replacing the generators of the ideal with new
generators that have a smaller degree. We present the experimental results and
other observations for DI in Appendix E.2.


Acknowledgements

This work has been facilitated through the COSINUS associate team between
Inria and Simula. The authors would like to thank Vincent Neiger and Maël
Hostettler for insightful discussions in the early stages of this work. The work
of Antoine Bak and Aurélien Boeuf was supported by the European Research
Council (ERC, grant agreement no. 101041545 “ReSCALE”). Aurélien Boeuf
was also supported in part by the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche
through the SWAP project under Contract ANR-21-CE39-0012. Antoine Bak
was also supported by the French DGA. The work of Morten Øygarden and
Atharva Phanse has been funded by a research grant from the Ethereum Foun-
dation through the Poseidon Cryptanalysis Initiative.


References
 1. Alfonsı́n, J.L.R.: The Diophantine Frobenius Problem, vol. 30. Oxford University
    Press (2005)
 2. Ashur, T., Bhati, A.S., Kindi, A., Mahzoun, M., Perrin, L.: XHash: Efficient
    STARK-friendly hash function. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2023/1045
    (2023), https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1045
 3. Ashur, T., Buschman, T., Mahzoun, M.: Algebraic cryptanalysis of HADES design
    strategy: Application to POSEIDON and poseidon2. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
    Paper 2023/537 (2023), https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/537


                                            28
 4. Ashur, T., Kindi, A., Meier, W., Szepieniec, A., Threadbare, B.: Rescue-prime
    optimized. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2022/1577 (2022), https://eprint.
    iacr.org/2022/1577
 5. Bak, A., Perrin, L.: On the security of Split-and-Lookup-based ZK-friendly primi-
    tives. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology 2025(2), 87–123 (2025)
 6. Bardet, M., Faugère, J.C., Salvy, B.: On the complexity of the f5 gröbner basis
    algorithm. Journal of Symbolic Computation 70, 49–70 (2015)
 7. Bariant, A., Boeuf, A., Lemoine, A., Manterola Ayala, I., Øygarden, M., Perrin, L.,
    Raddum, H.: The Algebraic FreeLunch: Efficient Gröbner Basis Attacks Against
    Arithmetization-Oriented Primitives. In: Annual International Cryptology Confer-
    ence (Crypto). pp. 139–173. Springer (2024)
 8. Bariant, A., Boeuf, A., Briaud, P., Hostettler, M., Øygarden, M., Raddum, H.: Im-
    proved Resultant Attack against Arithmetization-Oriented Primitives. Cryptology
    ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/259 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/259
 9. Bariant, A., Bouvier, C., Leurent, G., Perrin, L.: Algebraic attacks against some
    arithmetization-oriented primitives. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology
    2022(3), 73–101 (Sep 2022). https://doi.org/10.46586/tosc.v2022.i3.73-101,
    https://tosc.iacr.org/index.php/ToSC/article/view/9850
10. Becker, E., Mora, T., Marinari, M.G., Traverso, C.: The shape of the shape lemma.
    In: Proceedings of the 1994 International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic
    Computation. p. 129–133 (1994)
11. Ben-Sasson, E., Goldberg, L., Levit, D.: STARK friendly hash – survey and recom-
    mendation. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/948 (2020), https://eprint.
    iacr.org/2020/948
12. Bernshtein, D.N.: The number of roots of a system of equations. Functional Anal-
    ysis and Its Applications 9, 183–185 (1975), https://api.semanticscholar.org/
    CorpusID:122772773
13. Berthomieu, J., Neiger, V., Safey El Din, M.: Faster change of order algorithm for
    gröbner bases under shape and stability assumptions. In: Proceedings of the 2022
    International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation. pp. 409–418
    (2022)
14. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Van Assche, G.: On the Indifferentiability of
    the Sponge Construction. In: Annual International Conference on the Theory and
    Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. pp. 181–197. Springer (2008)
15. Beyne, T., Canteaut, A., Dinur, I., Eichlseder, M., Leander, G., Leurent, G., Naya-
    Plasencia, M., Perrin, L., Sasaki, Y., Todo, Y., et al.: Out of oddity–new cryptana-
    lytic techniques against symmetric primitives optimized for integrity proof systems.
    In: Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO 2020: 40th Annual International Cryptol-
    ogy Conference, CRYPTO 2020, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 17–21, 2020,
    Proceedings, Part III 40. pp. 299–328. Springer (2020)
16. Bouvier, C., Briaud, P., Chaidos, P., Perrin, L., Salen, R., Velichkov, V., Willems,
    D.: New design techniques for efficient arithmetization-oriented hash functions:
    Anemoi permutations and jive compression mode. In: Annual International Cryp-
    tology Conference. pp. 507–539. Springer (2023)
17. Campa, L., Roy, A.: Groebner basis cryptanalysis of anemoi. Cryptol-
    ogy ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/814 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/
    978-3-031-91107-1_11, https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/814
18. Cox, D.A., Little, J., O’Shea, D.: Ideals, Varieties, and Algorithms: An Introduction
    to Computational Algebraic Geometry and Commutative Algebra. Springer, fourth
    edn. (2015)


                                           29
19. Faugère, J.C.: A new efficient algorithm for computing gröbner bases
    (f4). Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 139(1), 61–88 (1999).
    https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-4049(99)00005-5,
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022404999000055
20. Faugère, J.C.: A new efficient algorithm for computing gröbner bases without re-
    duction to zero (f5). In: Proceedings of the 2002 International Symposium on Sym-
    bolic and Algebraic Computation. p. 75–83. ISSAC ’02, Association for Comput-
    ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2002). https://doi.org/10.1145/780506.
    780516, https://doi.org/10.1145/780506.780516
21. Faugère, J.C., Gaudry, P., Huot, L., Renault, G.: Sub-cubic change of ordering for
    gröbner basis: a probabilistic approach. In: Proceedings of the 39th International
    Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation. pp. 170–177 (2014)
22. Faugère, J.C., Gaudry, P., Huot, L., Renault, G.: Using symmetries in the index
    calculus for elliptic curves discrete logarithm. Journal of Cryptology 27(4), 595–635
    (2014)
23. Faugère, J., Gianni, P.M., Lazard, D., Mora, T.: Efficient computation of zero-
    dimensional gröbner bases by change of ordering. J. Symb. Comput. 16(4), 329–344
    (1993). https://doi.org/10.1006/JSCO.1993.1051, https://doi.org/10.1006/
    jsco.1993.1051
24. Faugère, J.C., Mou, C.: Sparse FGLM algorithms. Journal of Symbolic Computa-
    tion 80, 538–569 (2017)
25. Faugère, J.C., Safey El Din, M., Verron, T.: On the Complexity of Computing
    Gröbner Bases for Quasi-homogeneous Systems. In: ISSAC ’13 : Proceedings of
    the 38th International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation. pp.
    189–196. ACM, Boston, Maine, United States (Jun 2013). https://doi.org/10.
    1145/2465506.2465943, https://inria.hal.science/hal-00780388
26. Faugère, J.C., Safey El Din, M., Verron, T.: On the complexity of computing
    Gröbner bases for weighted homogeneous systems. Journal of Symbolic Computa-
    tion 76, 107–141 (2016)
27. Faugère, J.C., Gaudry, P., Huot, L., Renault, G.: Polynomial systems solving by
    fast linear algebra (2013), https://arxiv.org/abs/1304.6039
28. Faugère, J.C., Gianni, P., Lazard, D., Mora, T.: Efficient computation of zero-
    dimensional gröbner bases by change of ordering. Journal of Symbolic Computation
    16(4), 329–344 (1993)
29. Fusco, G., Bach, E.: Phase transition of multivariate polynomial systems. Mathe-
    matical Structures in Computer Science 19(1), 9–23 (2009)
30. Gianni, P., Mora, T.: Algebraic solution of systems of polynomial equations using
    groebner bases. vol. 356, pp. 247–257 (01 1987)
31. Grassi, L., Hao, Y., Rechberger, C., Schofnegger, M., Walch, R., Wang, Q.: Horst
    meets fluid-SPN: Griffin for zero-knowledge applications. In: Annual international
    cryptology conference. pp. 573–606. Springer (2023)
32. Grassi, L., Khovratovich, D., Lüftenegger, R., Rechberger, C., Schofnegger, M.,
    Walch, R.: Reinforced concrete: A fast hash function for verifiable computation.
    p. 1323–1335. CCS ’22, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
    USA (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3548606.3560686, https://doi.org/10.
    1145/3548606.3560686
33. Grassi, L., Khovratovich, D., Lüftenegger, R., Rechberger, C., Schofnegger, M.,
    Walch, R.: Monolith: Circuit-friendly hash functions with new nonlinear layers for
    fast and constant-time implementations. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryp-
    tology 2024(3), 44–83 (Sep 2024). https://doi.org/10.46586/tosc.v2024.i3.
    44-83, https://tosc.iacr.org/index.php/ToSC/article/view/11810


                                           30
34. Grassi, L., Khovratovich, D., Rechberger, C., Roy, A., Schofnegger, M.: Poseidon: A
    New Hash Function for Zero-Knowledge Proof Systems. In: 30th USENIX Security
    Symposium (USENIX Security 21). pp. 519–535 (2021)
35. Grassi, L., Khovratovich, D., Schofnegger, M.: Poseidon2: A faster version of the
    poseidon hash function. In: International Conference on Cryptology in Africa. pp.
    177–203. Springer (2023)
36. Grassi, L., Koschatko, K., Rechberger, C.: Poseidon and neptune: Gröbner ba-
    sis cryptanalysis exploiting subspace trails. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
    2025/954 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/954
37. Grassi, L., Onofri, S., Pedicini, M., Sozzi, L.: Invertible quadratic non-linear lay-
    ers for mpc-/fhe-/zk-friendly schemes over fnp: Application to poseidon. IACR
    Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology 2022(3), 20–72 (Sep 2022). https://
    doi.org/10.46586/tosc.v2022.i3.20-72, https://tosc.iacr.org/index.php/
    ToSC/article/view/9849
38. Jean, J.: TikZ for Cryptographers. https://www.iacr.org/authors/tikz/ (2016)
39. Khovanskii, A.: Newton polyhedra and toroidal varieties. Functional Analysis
    and Its Applications 11, 289–296 (1977), https://api.semanticscholar.org/
    CorpusID:53613658
40. Koschatko, K., Lüftenegger, R., Rechberger, C.: Exploring the six worlds
    of gröbner basis cryptanalysis: Application to anemoi. IACR Transac-
    tions on Symmetric Cryptology 2024(4), 138–190 (Dec 2024). https:
    //doi.org/10.46586/tosc.v2024.i4.138-190, https://tosc.iacr.org/index.
    php/ToSC/article/view/11953
41. Kushnirenko, A.G.: Newton polytopes and the bezout theorem. Functional Anal-
    ysis and Its Applications 10(3), 233–235 (1976). https://doi.org/10.1007/
    BF01075534, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01075534
42. Lazard, D.: Gröbner bases, gaussian elimination and resolution of systems of al-
    gebraic equations. In: van Hulzen, J.A. (ed.) Computer Algebra. pp. 146–156.
    Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (1983)
43. Roy, A., Steiner, M.J.: Generalized triangular dynamical system: An algebraic sys-
    tem for constructing cryptographic permutations over finite fields. In: International
    Conference on Selected Areas in Cryptography. pp. 139–165. Springer (2024)
44. Roy, A., Steiner, M.J., Trevisani, S.: Arion: Arithmetization-oriented permuta-
    tion and hashing from generalized triangular dynamical systems. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2303.04639 (2023)
45. Szepieniec, A., Lemmens, A., Sauer, J.F., Threadbare, B., Al-Kindi: The tip5 hash
    function for recursive STARKs. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/107 (2023),
    https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/107
46. Van Der Hoeven, J., Schost, É.: Multi-point evaluation in higher dimensions. Appli-
    cable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and Computing 24(1), 37–52 (2013)
47. Yang, H.S., Zheng, Q.X., Yang, J., Liu, Q.F., Tang, D.: A New Security Evaluation
    Method Based on Resultant for Arithmetic-Oriented Algorithms. In: International
    Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security
    (AsiaCrypt). pp. 457–489. Springer (2024)


A     On Sponges and CICOs
In this appendix we briefly recall the sponge function [14], its usage in AO-
cryptography and how various CICO problems (Definition 1) relate to concrete


                                           31
attacks on it. We will consider a AO-permutations F : Ftp −→ Ftp , where p is
large. (More precisely, so large that it will not be feasible to guess inputs or take
advantage of field equations xpi = xi .) Before introducing the sponge construction
itself, we start with a brief discussion on polynomial systems solving relevant to
our setting.

A.1    Polynomial Systems in the AO Setting
Since the function F can be written as t polynomials in t input variables, the
CICO-(in,out) problem can essentially be viewed as solving a system of poly-
nomial equations

                   fi (x1 , . . . , xt−in ) = 0,    for 1 ≤ i ≤ out.

As seen in the main body of this paper, an attacker often introduces further
variables and equations to this system, in order to simplify computations and/or
keep degrees small. As this expands the system by the same number of equa-
tions and variables, the difference between variables and equations will solely be
determined by the pair (t − in, out). This difference lead to the following cases.

Determined Systems, in + out = t. All instances of polynomial system solving
in this work consider a determined case (possibly after a reduction from an
underdetermined case, see below). In this setting we expect the polynomial ideal
to be zero dimensional, and have ideal degree DI > 1. The probability for
random determined systems to have at least one solution is given in [29] as
1 − 1/e (this is proved in the asymptotic case, and is also observed to hold in
small-scale experiments by the authors). We therefore expect that determined
CICO instances will have a solution with a fairly high probability, assuming that
the underlying permutation behaves like a random system in this manner.

Underdetermined Systems, in + out < t. Underdetermined polynomial systems
will have a positive dimensional ideal, and we expect many solutions. Finding
the whole solution space is generally difficult, as we lack efficient, direct methods
for solving positive dimensional polynomial systems. One immediate workaround
in cases where any one solution will do, is to fix a value for t − (in + out) input
variables and solve for the resulting determined system as above. However, for
AO-permutations we can often do better. The idea is to fix t − (in + out)
linear combinations among the input to effectively cancel out some of the initial
nonlinear operations, thus resulting in a determined system that is easier to
solve. The details of this strategy will vary depending of the specifications of F ,
and we refer to [9,7,8], as well as Appendix D for specific examples.

Overdetermined Systems, in + out > t. Random overdetermined systems is
                                                              −α
only expected to have a solution with probability 1 − e−p , where α = in +
out−t [29]. As such, given the larger values of p considered in this work, they are
only relevant in cases where the attacker knows that there will exist a solution
(e.g., certain preimage attacks on an observed digest).

                                               32
    We remark that an overdetermined system can naively be reduced to a de-
termined case, by only considering t − in output constraints. As we generically
expect a small number of solutions for determined cases, we do not anticipate
that spurious solutions will pose a problem for this method, and they can eas-
ily be disregarded a-posteriori through evaluating with the remaining output
constraints.
    More direct methods for solving overdetermined CICO problems is out of
scope for this work, and we restrict ourselves to offer only a few remarks. Gröbner
bases for overdetermined systems are, generally speaking, easier to compute than
those of (under)determined systems with the same number of variables. Note that
this does not necessarily translate into overdetermined CICO problems from AO
permutations being easier to solve than their (under)determined counterparts,
given that Gröbner basis computation is often not the bottleneck for the latter
case. However, solving overdetermined systems will indeed boil down to comput-
ing their Gröbner bases, as we expect either DI = 1 (with a single solution) or
DI = 0 (no solutions). We therefore believe that the behavior of overdetermined
CICO problems from AO permutations will differ significantly from the setting
investigated in this paper, and that its study will provide an interesting topic
for future work.


A.2     The Sponge Construction

The sponge construction is a general framework that constructs a hash function
from the permutation F . Let integers r, c > 0 denote the rate and capacity
respectively, where r+c = t. Figure 2 depicts the sponge function with respect to
the permutation F . An input m ∈ Fsp is partitioned into blocks m1 , . . . , mk ∈ Frp .


                  m0       m1       m2         m3             z0       z1       z2


       r field
      elements

                       F        F        F          F              F        F

       c field
      elements


                        Absorbing phase                      Squeezing phase


                 Fig. 2. The sponge construction (Figure from [38]).


If r does not divide the input length s, then the last tuple mk is padded via a
suitable scheme to ensure length r (concrete examples of this can be found in [35,
Section 3.1] and [2, Section 5.5]). The left half of the figure depicts the absorption
phase, where the blocks of m is added to the state in between iterations of F .


                                          33
The right half of the figure is the squeeze phase where blocks of the digest is
taken from the rate in between iterations of F . If the required digest length is
not divisible by r, the remaining field elements are simply discarded at the end
(along with the final state).

A.3   Modeling Polynomial Systems From the Sponge
Depending on its specifications, the sponge construction allows for several CICO
problems to be modeled. Based on our discussion in Appendix A.1, we derive the
following two rules of thumb for when modeling CICO systems that are easier to
solve. Firstly, an attacker wishes to minimize the “size” of the CICO problem. In
our setting this means looking for (under)determined cases that minimize out.
Secondly, if there are more than one cases that yield the same out, we go for
the problem with largest in, as this typically allows the attacker for bypass the
most S-boxes.
    With these considerations in mind, we offer the following concrete CICO
problems and discuss how they translate to attacks on the overall hash function.
We emphasize that this is not intended as an exhaustive list, nor will all cases
be applicable in every scenario. (There is, in particular, a notable variation in
sponge settings allowed by different designers. See, e.g., [34,35,2].)

1. Collision Attack (in,out) = (c, c). Solving this problem yields an output
   state where the capacity is 0, and hence a valid input state for the sponge.
   This enables an attacker to set up collision attacks in settings that allow for
   different input length for the sponge.
2. Preimage Attack I (in,out) = (c, r). If r field elements are kept as out-
   put from the squeezing (i.e., a single squeezing iteration), then solving this
   problem yields a preimage of r field elements. More generally, for a digest
   dig< r, this attack becomes (in,out) = (c,dig).
3. Preimage Attack II (in,out) = (r, r). In cases with more than one squeez-
   ing iteration, an attacker can attempt to recover a valid state by solving for
   the unknown capacity elements (as the rate from two consecutive states can
   be observed). We remark that for c > r, the CICO-problem itself will have
   many valid solutions, although we expect only a single of them to yield a
   valid preimage of the sponge. Hence, finding any valid CICO-solution, as
   discussed in A.1 need not yield a valid attack. If, moreover, the digest is not
   a multiple of r (i.e., dig mod r ̸= 0), we can focus on the CICO problem
   from the last squeeze with parameters (in,out) = (r,dig mod r).
4. Preimage Attack III (in,out) = (> c, r). This is a particular variant
   of Preimage Attack I in settings that allow for the use of input size input
   < r. In this case, an attacker can hope that a given digest has been hashed
   with a small input, and attempt to solve for increasing input sizes (note that
   the public padding scheme does not increase the degrees of freedom of the
   system). This will result in (a series of) overdetermined system(s) where the
   attacker will have a reasonable chance of success. If, in addition, we have a
   digest dig< r, this attack becomes (in,out) = (t−input,dig).

                                       34
B    Background on Gröbner Bases

This appendix provides some definitions and results on Gröbner bases that are
used throughout the paper.

Definition 10 (S-Polynomials). Let P, Q ∈ F[x], we define the S-polynomial
of P and Q as:

                   LCM(LM(P ), LM(Q))      LCM(LM(P ), LM(Q))
    Spol(P, Q) =                      ·P −                    ·Q .
                        LT(P )                  LT(Q)

Proposition 3 (Buchberger’s Criterion, Chapter 2, §6, Theorem 6 in
[18]). Let I ⊂ F[x] an ideal, G = {G1 , . . . , Gg } such that I = ⟨G⟩. We have that
G is a Gröbner basis for I if and only if for all 1 ≤ i < j ≤ g, we have that

                                                  G
                               Spol(Gi , Gj ) −
                                              →0.

Proposition 4 (Coprime leading monomials [18, Chapter 2,§9,Prop 4]).
Let G ⊂ F[x] a finite set. Let G1 , G2 ∈ G whose leading monomials are coprime.
Then we have that
                                                  G
                               Spol(G1 , G2 ) −
                                              →0.


C    Change of ordering

The most general algorithm for performing a change of ordering from a (w)grevlex
Gröbner basis to a lex Gröbner basis is the FGLM algorithm [28]. This algo-
rithm has complexity O(n · DI3 ) where n is the number of variables. Here we
recall the main refinements of this result. Note that all the algorithms discussed
in this appendix, with the exception of FGLM, assumes the knowledge of the
multiplication matrix of some variable. This multiplication matrix can be com-
puted freely under some stability condition [13]. Unfortunately, this assumption
does not hold for the systems we describe in this paper, which may make the
computation of the multiplication matrix a nontrivial step. A dedicated analysis
for this step for CLS is given in C.1.


Linear algebra-based change of ordering. Following [21], as long as the multi-
plication matrix of xn is known, we can compute the last polynomial of a lex
Gröbner basis in time
                                     Õ(DIω ) .

This is done by computing the characteristic polynomial of the multiplication
matrix of xn .


                                        35
Sparse FGLM. In the case where we know that the multiplication matrix of xn is
sparse, we can apply the Sparse-FGLM algorithm [24]. This algorithm recovers
the last polynomial of the lex Gröbner basis in time
                            O(DI · (Nn + log2 (DI ))) ,
where Nn is the number of nonzero coefficients in the multiplication matrix of
xn . It is known [24] that
                        p in the case of a generic system of n equations of degree
d, we have that Nn ∼ 6/nπ ·DI2 /d as d goes to infinity. This gives a complexity
   p           2+(n−1)/n
in 6/nπ · DI               for Sparse-FGLM, pwhich was used in [3] to assess the
security of Poseidon. Neglecting for the 6/nπ factor, this estimate compares
well to the linear algebra-based one when ω > 2 + (n − 1)/n. Taking ω = 2.807
as in the Strassen algorithm, this happens only when n ≤ 5, which is neither the
case for the modeling presented in [3] nor in our paper.

Hermite Normal Form change of ordering. When the multiplication matrix of
xn is known, and when the system is in shape position, i.e. its lex Gröbner basis
contains a univariate polynomial of degree DI , [13] shows that the change of
order can be computed in time
                               Õ tω−1
                                           
                                    n   DI ,
where tn is a sparsity indicator of this multiplication matrix, with tn DI ≈ Nn ,
which shows that this bound improves on both the linear algebra-based and
Sparse FGLM techniques. In particular, tn being the number of non-trivial
columns in the multiplication matrix, it is equal the size of the bordering |Bxn (G)|,
as defined in Appendix C.1, which we bound in Lemma 2 with some additional
hypotheses. In our case, we are only looking for a single univariate polynomial
in the ideal, and we can safely ignore ignore the shape assumption of the HNF
paper. Indeed, we can re-order the coefficients of the multiplication matrix using
an adaptation of Theorem 5.2 when y is not the smallest variable (as this last
hypothesis is unused in the proof), and computing its Hermite Normal Form in
the said complexity.

C.1    Refined analysis of the multiplication matrix computation for
       CheapLunch Systems based on FGLM’s approach
We here present a dedicated complexity analysis of the computation of the multi-
plication matrix described in FGLM [28, Proposition 3.1]. The general principle
of the algorithm is the same, but we define borderings w.r.t some variable xi or
yi , and give an upper bound on their sizes. This allows us to show that the com-
plexity of computing the multiplication matrices for CLS in SNP, under some
stability assumption of Q, can be reduced to
                                   (n + m)DI3
                                              
                               O                  ,
                                        dm

   where di = deg(Qtop
                   i ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ m.


                                         36
Bordering of an ideal. Let (Q, P) ⊂ R = F[x1 , . . . , xm , y1 , . . . , yn ] be a CLS in
SNP for some monomial order ≺, and G be a Gröbner basis of I = ⟨Q ∪ P⟩ w.r.t.
≺. We denote by C the canonical basis (w.r.t. G) of the quotient ring R/I. The
bordering of the ideal I w.r.t a variable x ∈ R is defined as

                             Bx (G) = {xm | m ∈ C} \ C,
and we obtain the bordering of I by taking the union over all variables in R:
                                        [
                       B(G) =                      Bz .
                                      z∈{x1 ,...,xm ,y1 ,...,yn }


In other words, the surface B(G) is made up of monomials t that do not them-
selves belong to C, but where we can find a variable z | t such that m
                                                                     z ∈ C. For
a CLS in SNP the size of these borderings are restricted as follows.
Lemma 2. Let (P, Q) be a CLS with Q that verifies stability and is in SNP
for some monomial order ≺ s.t. wt(xi ) = wx is constant for the variables xi ,
1 ≤ i ≤ m (but the weights of the yi are not necessarily constant). Let G be a
Gröbner basis for the CLS w.r.t ≺, and let us denote dl = deg(Qtop
                                                                 l ). Then we
have
                                 n         m−1    ℓ
                                      !                 !!
                                 Y          X Y      dl
                   |Bxm (G)| ≤      αl ·                   ,
                                                     wx
                                      l=1             ℓ=1     l=1

where the αi ’s are as described in Definition 8. In particular, when none of the
Qtop
  l   are linear in the xi ’s (i.e. dl ≥ 2wx for all l), we have, if we denote DI the
ideal degree:
                                                   2DI wx
                                |Bxm (G)| ≤               .
                                                    dm

Proof. First, let us consider the monomial ordering ≺′ on the xi such that
wt≺′ (xi ) = wt≺ (xi )/wx . The monomial ordering ≺′ is a grevlex ordering on the
xi since all its weights are 1. It can easily be seen that these ordering are equiv-
alent when comparing monomials containing xi ’s, therefore that G≺′ (Qtop ) =
G≺ (Qtop ) which we denote G(Qtop ), and that the borderings w.r.t. the variables
xi are equal in both cases. Let us assume the stability of Q. This property implies
that Bxm (G(Qtop )) ⊂ LM(G(Qtop )). As:
                                 n
                  (                                                   )
                                Y
                      γ β                                         top
             C= y x |γ∈             {0, . . . , αi − 1}, β ∈ C(G(Q )) ,
                                i=1

we have for t ∈ C, that xm t ̸∈ C only if t = yγ xβ , β ∈ Bxm (G(Qtop )). Thus
                         n                             n
                               !                           !
                        Y                             Y
                                            top
         |Bxm (G)| =        αi · |Bxm (Q )| ≤            αi · |G(Qtop )| .
                          i=1                                 i=1


                                              37
   We can then use the SNP of Qtop and Theorem 12 from [6] with the grevlex
ordering ≺′ (such that deg≺′ (Qtop
                                l ) = dl /wx ) to upper bound the number of
elements in a reduced Gröbner basis by
                                      m−1  ℓ
                                                  !
                              top
                                      X Y      dl
                        |G(Q )| ≤                   .
                                               wx
                                             ℓ=1     l=1


   This concludes the first part of the theorem. When the Qtop l   are not linear,
then dl /wx ≥ 2 for all l, thus the sums of these terms can be bounded by twice
the largest term, i.e:
                                      m−1    ℓ          m−1
                                                  !
                              top
                                      X Y      dl        Y dl
                        |G(Q )| ≤                    ≤2          .
                                               wx           wx
                                          ℓ=1      l=1           l=1
                             Qn       Qm
   This, together with DI = ( l=1 αl ) l=1 (dl /wx ), concludes the proof.                   ⊔
                                                                                             ⊓

Refined algorithm. The algorithm proceeds as follows, from a Gröbner basis G
(whose leading terms have coefficient one) w.r.t. an order ≺:

 1. Sort the bordering B(G) according to the monomial order ≺, and denote
    the elements of the sorted bordering as {b1 , . . . b|B(G)| } (s.t. bi ≺ bi+1 for all
    i).
 2. Iterate on i = 1 . . . |B(G)|. At each iteration, compute RedG,≺ (bi ) using
    the already computed normal forms of bj , for j < i. To do so, proceed the
    following way:
    (a) If bi is the leading term of an element of g ∈ G, the reduction is bi − g.
    (b) Else, if xm |bi and bi /xm ∈ B(G), compute Q = xm RedG,≺ (bi /xm ). The
         monomials of Q which are not in C are all in Bxm (G), thus there are at
         most |Bxm (G)| of them. Reduce each using the already computed normal
         forms.
    (c) Else, there exists another variable z ∈ {y1 , . . . yn , x1 , . . . xm−1 } s.t. bi /z ∈
         B(G). In this case, compute Q = RedG,≺ (zRedG,≺ (bi /z)).
 3. Once all the normal forms of the bordering have been computed, all the
    multiplication matrices Ti can be freely recovered.

Complexity Analysis. We iterate |B(G)| ≤ (n + m)DI times. At each itera-
tion, step (a) costs at most O(DI ), for a total cost of roughly O(|B(G)| · DI ).
At each iteration, step (b) costs |Bxm (G)| · DI , for a total cost of roughly
O(|B(G)| · |Bxm (G)| · DI ). For estimating the cost of step (c), let us give an
upper bound on the number of elements of B(G) which do not satisfy the con-
dition of (b). Condition of (b) is not satisfied if either bi ̸∈ Bxm (G) or xm ∤ bi .
There are at most |Bxm (G)| iterations such that bi ∈ Bxm (G). Let us now es-
timate the number of monomials bi ∈ B(G) which are such that xm ∤ bi with
bi ∈
   / Bxm (G). For z ∈ {y1 , . . . , yn , x1 , . . . , xm−1 }, if bi ∈ Bz (G) is not divisi-
ble by xm , then bi /z ∈ C, and there exists j s.t. bi /z × xim ∈ Bxm (G). This


                                              38
map from monomials Bz (G) non divisible by xm to Bxm (G) is injective, there-
fore there are at most |Bxm (G)| monomials of Bz (G) that are not divisible by
xm . In total, (n + m)|Bxm (G)| is an upper bound of the number of elements of
B(G) going through (c). Each element going through (c) induces a complexity
of |DI | · |Bz (G)| ≤ DI2 look-up table accesses, therefore this last step has a total
complexity O((n + m)|Bxm (G)| · DI2 ).
    In total, given that |B(G)| ≤ (n + m)DI and |Bxm (G)| = O(DI wt(xm )/dm ),
the complexity of computing the multiplication matrix is:

                               O (n + m)DI3 wx /dm .
                                                     


C.2    Refined analysis of the multiplication matrix based on [27]
Computing the multiplication matrix in a grevlex ordering. Let ≺ be a grevlex
ordering and dmax be the maximal total degree among monomials in the canon-
ical basis of R/I, so that dmax + 1 is a bound for the total degree of elements
in B(G). The idea of [27, Algorithm 4] is to sort the elements in the bordering
B(G) according to their total degree instead of the monomial ordering, that
is, for each 1 ≤ d ≤ dmax + 1, consider B(G)d the elements of the border-
ing B(G) of degree d. [27] remarked that if the normal forms of elements of
B(G)1 . . . B(G)d−1 have been computed, then the normal forms of all elements
of B(G)d can be computed simultaneously. To do so, for each m ∈ B(G)d , [27]
finds a polynomial in I whose leading term is m: either m is the leading term
of an element of G, or m can be written as xi × m′ with m′ ∈ B(G)d−1 , which
implies that xi (m′ − RedG,≺ (m′ )) is a polynomial in I whose leading term is m.
[27] places each such polynomial in a Macaulay-like matrix Md , whose columns
represent the monomials in B(G)1 ∪ · · · ∪ B(G)d ∪ C. [27] also places the poly-
nomials m − RedG,≺ (m) for m ∈ B(G)1 ∪ · · · ∪ B(G)d−1 in Md . Let us define
                               Pd−1
Bd = |B(G)d | and B1,d−1 = i=1 Bi . All in all, Md is a B1,d × (B1,d + DI )
matrix. the inner structure of Md can be described as:

                                    Bd B1,d−1 DI
                                                    !
                                    A     B     C       Bd
                           Md =
                                    0     I     D       B1,d−1


    where 0 and I correspond to respectively the zero and identity matrices. From
this matrix, in order to obtain the normal forms of the elements of B(G)d , all
one has to do is to compute A−1 (C − BD), which is a Bd × DI matrix containing
all the desired normal forms.

Complexity analysis. We make use of the following lemma:
Lemma 3 (Rectangular matrix multiplication). Let M and m × n matrix
and N an n × p matrix. The product M · N can be computed in time:

                    O(max(mnpω−2 , mω−2 · np, mnω−2 · p)) .


                                         39
The lemma follows from a decomposition of M and N in square blocks of size
min(m, n, p).
   Computing the normal forms of the elements of B(G)d at step d requires to
compute A−1 in
                                 O(Bdω )
operations, computing B × D in
                                                                       
         O max(Bdω−2 · B1,d · DI , Bd · B1,d
                                         ω−2
                                             · DI , Bd · B1,d · DIω−2 )

operations, and finally computing A−1 × (C − BD) in

                         O max(Bdω−1 · DI , Bd · DIω−1 )
                                                        


operations.
   Since Bd ≤ B1,d ≤ nDI (where n is the number of variables) and max(a, b) ≤
a + b, the cost of step d can easily be bounded by:

                          O(Bdω−2 · nDI2 + nBd · DIω−1 ).

   Therefore, because of the concavity of the function x 7→ xω−2 , and assuming
that n ≤ dmax , the total complexity can be bounded by:


             dmax
              X+1
                    O Bdω−2 · nDI2 + nBd · DIω−1
                                                   

              d=1
                                               !ω−2                   
                                Pdmax +1
                                           Bd
             ≤ O nDI2 dmax        d=1
                                                       + nB1,dmax DIω−1 
                                    dmax

             = O(d3−ω
                  max n
                        ω−1 ω
                           DI + n2 DIω )
             = O(d3−ω
                  max n
                        ω−1 ω
                           DI ).

Adaptation to weighted orderings. Let us now assume that we possess a Gröbner
basis for a weighted monomial ordering with weights (w1 , . . . wn ). In order to use
the multiplication matrix computation algorithm of [27] with weighted orderings,
we need the wi ’s to be integers, so that the elements in the bordering B(G)
have integer weighted degrees, and so that for each m ∈ B(G), there exists an
integer 1 ≤ d ≤ wdmax +max(wi ), where wdmax is the maximum weighted degree
among monomials in the canonical basis of R/I, such that m ∈ B(G)d . The same
analysis holds, but dmax + 1 should be replaced by wdmax + max(wi ). Since we
expect every variable to appear in R/I, we expect wdmax ≥ max(wi ), giving the
following bound for computing a multiplication matrix for CheapLunch systems:

                            O wd3−ω        ω−1 ω
                                                 
                                max (n + m)   DI .                              (17)


                                         40
D     Round-skipping trick on the first rounds


D.1    Case of SPN with monomial S-boxes


Case of an MDS matrix In this section, we show how reduce the ideal degree
of the ideal by partially skipping the first round. Let M an MDS matrix, and
s = ⌊t/k⌋ − 2 ≤ k. We also let M −1 = (minv   ij )1≤i,j≤t the inverse of M , which
is also MDS. For 1 ≤ l ≤ s, we consider the matrix (minv  ij )     t−k+1≤i≤t     :
                                                                                (l−1)(k+1)+1≤j≤l(k+1)
this k × (k + 1) matrix has a kernel of dimension at least 1. We let al a nonzero
vector in this kernel.
    Then, we turn our attention to (minv
                                     ij ) t−k+1≤i≤t , this is a k × (t − s(k + 1))
                                                         s(k+1)+1≤j≤t
submatrix of M −1 . As M −1 is MDS, its submatrix has full rank. Thus, we can
find independent vectors as+1 , . . . ak in its kernel (as k − s ≤ t − s(k + 1) − k)
                  t−s(k+1)                                      (1)
and a vector b ∈ Fp        such that M −1 ((0, . . . , 0, b) − cE ) ∈ Fpt−k × {0}k .
    Setting the state after the affine layer to

                                                           k
                                                                               !
                               1/d
                                                           X
                         a1 · x1 , . . . , as · x1/d
                                                 s ,              al · xl + b      ,
                                                          l=s+1


we get after the layer of S-boxes the state

       ad1 · x1 , . . . , ads · xs , P1 (xs+1 , . . . , xk ), . . . , Pt−s(k+1) (xs+1 , . . . , xk ) ,
                                                                                                    


where the Pi have degree d. Multiplying the weight of x1 , . . . , xs by d and keeping
weights of xs+1 , . . . , xk and the yj , we keep the same bounds on the weighted
degrees of the polynomials in the system from Section 4.1 and 4.2. Thus, our
new weights only increase the denominator in the weighted Bézout bound by a
factor ds , dividing the upper bound on DI by the same factor.



Case of a non-MDS matrix Though we did not manage to do an extensive
study of the round-skipping tricks in the non-MDS case, we have made some
observations that tend to show that non-MDS matrices such as the ones defined
in Poseidon2 may be weaker against such tricks than MDS ones. We provide
here an example of a vector allowing to skip two rounds in the case where ME is
defined as in [35] and where t = 16, k = 1 (ie. we reduce DI by a factor d2 instead
of d). This tends to show that contrary to what was believed by the designers
of Poseidon2, using non-MDS matrices not only weakens the security against
statistical attacks, but also against some algebraic attacks. The matrix ME is as

                                                    41
                                 1/d
                          a11 · x1            xd     ad11 · x1

                                 1/d
                          a12 · x1            xd     ad12 · x1

                                 1/d
                          a13 · x1            xd     ad13 · x1

                                 1/d
                          a14 · x1            xd     ad14 · x1

                         a21 · x2 +
                ME                            xd    P1 (x2 , x3 )   ME
                        a31 · x3 + b1
                         a22 · x2 +
                                              xd    P2 (x2 , x3 )
                        a32 · x3 + b2
                         a23 · x2 +
           0                                  xd    P3 (x2 , x3 )
                        a33 · x3 + b3
                         a24 · x2 +
           0                                  xd    P4 (x2 , x3 )
                        a34 · x3 + b4
                         a25 · x2 +
           0                                  xd    P5 (x2 , x3 )
                        a35 · x3 + b5


                Fig. 3. Round-skipping trick for t = 9, k = 3, s = 1.



follows:                                          
                10 14 2 6 5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3
                8 12 2 2 4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 
                                                  
                2 6 10 14 1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 
                                                  
                2 2 8 12 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 
                                                  
                5 7 1 3 10 14 2 6 5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 
                                                  
                4 6 1 1 8 12 2 2 4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 
                                                  
                1 3 5 7 2 6 10 14 1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 
                                                  
                1 1 4 6 2 2 8 12 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 
                5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 10 14 2 6 5 7 1 3  .
                                                  
                                                  
                4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 8 12 2 2 4 6 1 1 
                                                  
                1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 2 6 10 14 1 3 5 7 
                                                  
                1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 2 2 8 12 1 1 4 6 
                                                  
                5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 10 14 2 6 
                                                  
                4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 8 12 2 2 
                                                  
                1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 1 3 5 7 2 6 10 14
                 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 1 1 4 6 2 2 8 12

We can for instance skip two rounds on an instance defined over the prime
number pkoalabear = 231 − 224 + 1, in which case d = 3 and the first two round


                                         42
constants9 are:
                                                  
                       0x1b9721fa          0x37b608e3
                     0x1252dc26        0x2a201928
                                                  
                     0x686dc5c6        0x6a38a2ab
                                                  
                     0x65e48721        0x796c8c09
                                                  
                     0x68c4a3e4         0x460cd14 
                                                  
                     0x5dc974d7        0x6bac6d28
                                                  
                     0x6c06ab8f        0x4551b22d
                                                  
                 (1)
                     0x286a3475 (2) 0x773c1a8d
                C = 
                                  , C = 0x5e977d45 .
                                                   
                      0x103790a                   
                     0x13dcd1d0        0x463ecca9
                                                  
                     0x30cfa2c1        0x7011d7aa
                                                  
                     0x6087354f        0x7767d67f
                                                  
                     0x7c66b137        0x545d8d19
                                                  
                     0x42070c64        0x2801b9fe
                                                  
                     0x6f777ed5        0x143c8a7e
                       0xbc35277           0x1bdd37c

We can have a subspace chain of the form:

                   SE ◦(C (1) +ME (.))         SE ◦(C (2) +ME (.))
       a0 · X + b0 −−−−−−−−−−−−→ a1 · Y + b1 −−−−−−−−−−−−→ a2 · Z + b2 .

where
                                                           
                0x0              0x3055717b              0x0
            
               0x0    
                       
                                0x2112c45a
                                           
                                                    
                                                        0x0    
                                                                
            
               0x0    
                               0x3405c236
                                                  
                                                        0x0    
                                                                
            
               0x0    
                               0x7133b04c
                                                  
                                                        0x0    
                                                                
            0x3ae7d1cb        0x7b577bb9         0xfe00000 
                                                           
            0x693aa524         0xd508a2e        0x6f200001
                                                           
            0x2892157b         0x56357b8        0x5f400000
                                                           
            0x2ceec489
                        , b0 = 0x12546263 , a1 = 0x3f800001 ,
                                                             
       a0 = 
            0x44182e36        0x1cb56c27        0x6f200001
                                                           
            0x15c55add         0x258c017         0xfe00000 
                                                           
            0x566dea86        0x4aefc4d0        0x1fc00001
                                                           
            0x52113b78        0x560b9321        0x3f800000
                                                           
            
               0x0    
                       
                                0x709b4660
                                           
                                                    
                                                        0x0    
                                                                
            
               0x0    
                               0x22d30c54
                                                  
                                                        0x0    
                                                                
               0x0                0x0               0x0    
                0x0                  0x0                 0x0


9
    Taken from: https://github.com/0xPolygonZero/hash-constants


                                         43
                                                            
             0x7735495b               0x0             0x4631f432
            0x537f27be             0x0           0x751952a5
                                                            
            0x1bb89dd6             0x0           0x19d1ccbf
                                                            
            
                0x8    
                        
                                 
                                     0x0   
                                            
                                                     0x6c58e374
                                                                
            
                0x0    
                        
                                 
                                     0x1   
                                            
                                                     
                                                         0x0    
                                                                 
            
                0x0    
                        
                                 
                                     0x0   
                                            
                                                     0x7547bdb1
                                                                
            
                0x0    
                        
                                 
                                     0x0   
                                            
                                                     0x6f214b81
                                                                
                0x0                0x0           0x4998e026
       b1 = 
            
                         , a2 = 0x7f000000 , b2 = 
                                                              .
                0x0                                  0x0    
                                                                 
            
                0x0    
                        
                                 
                                     0x0   
                                            
                                                     0x4ff97fbe
                                                                
            
                0x0    
                        
                                 
                                     0x0   
                                            
                                                     0x1d4d82d8
                                                                
            
                0x0    
                        
                                 
                                     0x0   
                                            
                                                     0x710ad114
                                                                
            0x6074c09b             0x0           0x19a2ea37
                                                            
             0x545fc9f             0x0           0x565348fb
                                                            
            0x53c6e278             0x0           0x66dd789c
             0x4e44b8b7               0x0              0x906ff3d
We leave as an open problem a more systematic study of this phenomenon.


D.2     Case of Griffin

The bounds on the ideal degree have been derived by introducing the variables
x1 , . . . , xk on k input branches in a naive way and setting the t − k other ones to
0. When t > 2k, it is feasible to choose the input state to get a modeling with a
lower ideal degree. Let t, k ∈ N, we can skip rounds in Griffin as summarized
in Table 3. We introduce αd,k = d(3k − 1) + 1 and recall that without round-
skipping, we conjecture that DI ≤ (d · αd,k )R . We say that we have an advantage
over DI of α if we can find a modeling of the CICO problem that makes the
ideal degree upper bounded by (d · αd,k )R /α.


   t      2k + 1    ≥ 2k + 2     4k + 2 − 2s, s ≤ k/2    4k + 4       ≥ 4k + 6
 Adv.       d     d · αd,k /3k
                                 d · αd,k /3  2s−1        2
                                                    d · αd,k    (d · αd,k )2 /3k
            Table 3. Advantage over DI using round skips in Griffin.



   The round-skipping tricks are performed as follows:

 – Let t = 2k + 1: We can find a k-dimensional vector space X ⊂ Ft−k
                                                                   p   × {0}k
                                          t−1
   such that for x ∈ X, M · x ∈ {0} × Fp . Thus we do not activate the first
   round x1/d , reducing the ideal degree by a factor d.
 – Let t ≥ 2k + 2: We take a k-dimensional space such that for x ∈ X, M · x ∈
   {0}2 × Ft−2
            p . Thus we do not activate the first round x
                                                          1/d
                                                              and xd , so that
   we only have degree 3 polynomials in the xi at round 2 (we do not have to
   introduce y1 and z1 ).


                                         44
 – Let t = 4k + 2 − 2s, s ≤ k/2: We can find a k-dimensional vector space
   X ⊂ Ft−k
          p    × {0}k such that for x ∈ X, M · x ∈ {0}2 × (Fp × {0})2(k−s) × F2s          p .
   Taking an input state in X, we can get after the first nonlinear layer a state
   of the form:
                                                                                      
              0, 0, L1 (x), 0, . . . , L2(k−s) (x), 0, L̃1 (x), P2 (x), . . . , P2s (x) ,

   where the Li , L̃1 are linear functions, and the Pi have degree 3. Introducing
   for each Pi a variable x̃i = Pi (x) of weight 1, we get a state of weight 1 after
   one round at the cost of 2s − 1 equations of degree 3. Hence, it amounts
   to skipping one round of Griffin and adding 2s − 1 equations of degree 3,
   which adds a factor 32s−1 to the ideal degree of an R − 1-round Griffin.
 – Let t = 4k + 4: In addition to not activating the xd , x1/d and one out of two
   branches in the Horst layer in the first round, we also do not activate the
   second round x1/d . This is feasible as we can find a k + 1-dimensional space
   such that for x ∈ X, M · x ∈ {0}2 × (Fp × {0})2k+1 . After the first nonlinear
   layer, this space is mapped to another k + 1-dimensional vector space and
   we can cancel out the coordinate in x1/d of the second round.
 – The case t ≥ 4k + 6 is very similar to the previous one, except that we make
   use of our additional degree of freedom to not activate the second round xd .


E      Experiments
E.1     Regularity assumption tests
We test the property of regularity (Definition 9)used in proving results on the
Gröbner basis computation of CheapLunch systems from Section 4. Specifically,
we check if the Hilbert series of the highest degree component of the subsystem Q
is equal to the expected form as stated in Definition 5. To make the computation
of the system more efficient, we make certain simplifications in our experiment.
Specifically, as we are only interested in higest degree (“top”) part of the system,
we remove (at round level computation) the constant addition and also get rid
of the lower degree terms after computing the partial rounds. This allows us
to construct the polynomials more efficiently in order to test closer to realistic
parameters. Then we compute the Hilbert series in Magma and compare it with
the expected form, in python, Following is the table of parameters for which we
performed the tests.

Poseidon For generating the MDS matrix, we used the SageMath script 10
provided in the Poseidon paper, and use the same primes for our tests. In Table
4 we list the different values of number of full rounds RF , number of partial
rounds RP , S-Box exponent α, number of branches t, CICO-constraint k for
which we verified the regularity assumption.
10
     https://extgit.isec.tugraz.at/krypto/hadeshash/-/tree/master/code?ref_
     type=heads


                                            45
                Field size (bits)    RF /2            RP     α    t       k
                       64                2            20     3    24      2,3
                       64                3            20     3    24      2
                      254             2,3             20     5    3       2
                      254             2,3             20     5    5       2
                      255                2            20     5    3       2
                     255             2       20     5      5      2
               Table 4. Parameters tested for regularity for Poseidon



Neptune We follow the design from [37] and generator random matrices, which
are used to define external and internal MDS matrix. In Table 5 we list the
different values of number of first full rounds RF 1 , number of partial rounds RP ,
number of first full rounds RF 2 , number of branches t, CICO-constraint k for
which we verified the regularity assumption. The S-Box exponent α is always
set to 3.


               Field size (bits)    RF 1      RP           RF 2       t       k
                      64             2            6         1     4,6,8       2
                     255             2            6         1     4,6,8       2
                    254            2       6       1       4,6,8  2
               Table 5. Parameters tested for regularity for Neptune




E.2   ArionHash
We provide the details of experiments for testing the ideal degree for some in-
stances of ArionHash. We choose small scale parameter sets, following [44]. Specif-
ically, for two cases p = 10007, e = 3 and p = 15013, e = 5, we vary the values of
t, k, α and compute the degree of the ideal DI . In [44] this was only tested for the
case of k = 1, and in this case the experimental data matches their conjectured
upper bound. However for k > 1 we observed that the Weighted Bézout bound
2 is not tight for estimating the value of DI . This is expected since the system
is not regular as discussed in 5.2. Below we present the experimental results for
ideal degree of ArionHash in table E.2 and show that the upper bound we derive
in (16) holds.

A better upper bound for DI As discussed in 5.2, the output constraint poly-
                                                    (r)          (r)
nomials Q1 , . . . , Qk are linear combinations of F1 , . . . , Ft and deg(F1r ) >


                                             46
                     t   k       p = 10007, e = 3        p = 15013, e = 5
                                  DI      Bound           DI      Bound
                                           α=7
                     4   2        623       2639          1351        5719
                     5   2       1855      12383          4207       27391
                     5   3       3619     160979         11557      520429
                     6   2       4991      53375         11599      119119
                                          α = 257
                     4   2       22873    96889          49601      209969

            Table 6. Experimental results for Ideal degree of ArionHash




deg(F2r ) > . . . > deg(Ftr ). Hence, the system os not regular, but we use these
dependencies to cancel out higher degree terms and improve the upper bound
for DI . Moreover, as seen in table E.2, this bound is far from being a tight
bound and we point out a possible cause of this, which is presence of further
dependencies in the polynomials. From equation (11), we can write


          r              (r−1)                              (r−1)
    T op(Fj−1 (x)) = Lj−1 (x)e · T op(σj,t )2 = Lj−1 (x)e · T op(Fjr (x))2        (18)
               (r)       (r−1)           (r−1)
        T op(Ft−1 ) = Lt−1 (x)e · (Lt            (x)))2 ,                         (19)



    Thus, we can see that after the non-linear layer, the highest degree component
of output on a branch depends on the input of that branch, and the highest
degree component of the previous branch. (In fact this property was used in [44,
Lemma 2] to prove the degree at every round). This observation could possibly be
exploited to improve the upper bound from (16), since the degrees of polynomials
in the state after a non-linear round decrease from “left-to -right”
     However, there are certain limitations in test this experimentally. The highest
degree at j-th round of ArionHash is (2t−1 (e + 1) − e)j . This limits us in the
number of rounds for which we can build the polynomial system and compute the
ideal degree. In our experiments, we could only test for r = 1. As a result of this,
it is important to note that we cannot take into consideration the contribution of
r and the contribution of weights in experimental values of DI . Moreover, from
                  (r)                                                          (r−1)
(19) the terms Fj have a recurrence relation, but they also depend on Lj
                                                 (r−1)
from the previous round, and for r = 1, Lk         ) are simply linear functions in the
input variables x1 , . . . , xk . Thus, the exact contribution of these dependencies
may not appear in experiments for r = 1.


                                            47
E.3   Griffin

We provide here the results of our experiments on the weighted degree of regu-
larity for the Griffin CICO-k problem. We conducted experiments on various
values of k, d, R (with t = 8) and made the following conjecture:
Conjecture 2 (weighted degree of regularity of Griffin). For all t, k, d, R, the
weighted degree of regularity wdreg of the Griffin CICO-k problem is upper
bounded as:
                               wdreg ≤ dk · 3R .
We computed the weighted degree of regularity by running weighted F5 on the
system, and take the highest weighted degree at which a new polynomial is
added to the Gröbner basis. It is easy to check that the Macaulay matrix at this
degree contains a Gröbner basis of the system, and that this is the lowest degree
verifying such condition. We report our results in the following tables, with a
comparison to our conjectured upper bound.


                              d       2        3           5   7
                          wdreg      34        48       79     122
                         dk · 3R    36    54     90    126
           Table 7. Influence of d on wdreg in the case where k = R = 2.




                     (R, k, d)    (2, 3, 2)        (2, 3, 3)   (3, 2, 2)
                      wdreg          49               74           105
                           R
                     dk · 3       54         81         108
                       Table 8. Influence of R, k on wdreg .




E.4   Experimental results on XHash

In the following table, our results on XHash are described. The column “Does
Sec. 3.3 apply?” has a checkmark (✓) if and only if G(P, Q) can be decomposed
as P ∪G(Q), and G(Q) can directly be computed from G(Qtop ) as per Section 3.3.
Experimentally, we can use the following heuristic workaround in some of the
“bad” cases: instead of defining Qtop only with the homogeneous top part of the
Qi , use several “top homogeneous slices” from the Qi , none of which contain the
yi,j variables. The system obtained is not homogeneous, but we can still use F4


                                              48
to compute a GB for it, and a variant of Lemma 1 applies correctly. The precise
study of this approach falls outside of the scope of this paper, and we leave it
for future work.


    (t, k, nS )   wdreg   (Thm. 1)     DI     (Bézout)    Does Sec. 3.3 apply?
      (2,2,1)      11       (17)        81      (243)               ✗
      (3,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (3,2,2)      11       (17)       243      (729)               ✗
      (3,3,1)      14       (25)       729     (2187)               ✗
      (3,3,2)      13       (25)       729     (6561)               ✗
      (4,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (4,2,2)      17       (17)       729      (729)               ✓
      (4,2,3)      17       (17)       729     (2187)               ✗
      (4,3,1)      25       (25)      2187     (2187)               ✓
      (4,3,2)      19       (25)      2187     (6561)               ✗
      (5,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (5,2,2)      17       (17)       729      (729)               ✓
      (5,2,3)      17       (17)      2187     (2187)               ✓
      (5,2,4)      17       (17)      2187     (6561)               ✗
      (5,3,1)      25       (25)      2187     (2187)               ✓
      (6,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (6,2,2)      17       (17)       729      (729)               ✓
      (7,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (7,2,2)      17       (17)       729      (729)               ✓
      (8,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (8,2,2)      17       (17)       729      (729)               ✓
      (9,2,1)      17       (17)       243      (243)               ✓
      (9,2,2)      17       (17)       729      (729)               ✓
     (10,2,1)      17       (17)      243       (243)               ✓
     (10,2,2)      17       (17)      729       (729)               ✓
     (11,2,1)      17       (17)      243       (243)               ✓
     (11,2,2)      17       (17)      729       (729)               ✓
Table 9. Experimental data of XHash8 on a reduced version of (F )(B ′ )(P 3). nS is
the number of Sboxes per (P ′ ) layer. We take α = 3 instead of 7.




F    Figures of some round function




                                        49
      C0                       C1            C2            C3
                                         1
s0               x 7
                                     x   7

s1               x 7
                                                  x7
                                         1
s2               x 7
                                     x   7
                                         1
s3               x 7
                                     x7
s4               x7                               x7
                                         1
s5               x 7
                                     x   7
           M            M                1             M
s6               x7                  x7
s7               x7                               x7
                                         1
s8               x7                  x   7
                                         1
s9               x7                  x7
s10              x7                               x7
                                         1
s11              x 7
                                     x   7




                Fig. 4. The first round of XHash8.




                               M

                               G1 ⊠
                        0
                                             G2 ⊠
               x1/d       xd


           Fig. 5. The Griffin round function for t = 4.




                                50
